Phrase-based Image Captioning

Rémi Lebret∗
Pedro O. Pinheiro∗
Idiap Research Institute, Martigny, Switzerland
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
Ronan Collobert
Facebook AI Research, Menlo Park, CA, USA

Abstract
Generating a novel textual description of an image is an interesting problem that connects computer vision and natural language processing. In
this paper, we present a simple model that is able
to generate descriptive sentences given a sample
image. This model has a strong focus on the syntax of the descriptions. We train a purely bilinear
model that learns a metric between an image representation (generated from a previously trained
Convolutional Neural Network) and phrases that
are used to described them. The system is then
able to infer phrases from a given image sample. Based on caption syntax statistics, we propose a simple language model that can produce
relevant descriptions for a given test image using the phrases inferred. Our approach, which is
considerably simpler than state-of-the-art models, achieves comparable results in two popular
datasets for the task: Flickr30k and the recently
proposed Microsoft COCO.

1. Introduction
Being able to automatically generate a description from an
image is a fundamental problem in artificial intelligence,
connecting computer vision and natural language processing. The problem is particularly challenging because it
requires to correctly recognize different objects in images
and how they interact. Another challenge is that an image
description generator needs to express these interactions in
a natural language (e.g. English). Therefore, a language
∗

These two authors contributed equally to this work.
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

REMI @ LEBRET. CH
PEDRO @ OPINHEIRO . COM

RONAN @ COLLOBERT. COM

model is implicitly required in addition to visual understanding.
Recently, this problem has been studied by many different
authors. Most of the attempts are based on recurrent neural networks to generate sentences. These models leverage the power of neural networks to transform image and
sentence representations into a common space (Mao et al.,
2015; Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015; Vinyals et al., 2014; Donahue et al., 2014).
In this paper, we propose a different approach to the problem that does not rely on complex recurrent neural networks. An exploratory analysis of two large datasets of
image descriptions reveals that their syntax is quite simple. The ground-truth descriptions can be represented as
a collection of noun, verb and prepositional phrases. The
different entities in a given image are described by the
noun phrases, while the interactions or events between
these entities are encoded by both the verb and the prepositional phrases. We thus train a model that predicts the
set of phrases present in the sentences used to describe
the images. By leveraging previous works on word vector representations, each phrase can be represented by the
mean of the representations of the words that compose the
phrase. Vector representations for images can also be easily
obtained from some pre-trained convolutional neural networks. The model then learns a common embedding between phrase and image representations (see Figure 3).
Given a test image, a bilinear model is trained to predict
a set of top-ranked phrases that best describe it. Several
noun phrases, verb phrases and prepositional phrases are
in this set. The objective is therefore to generate syntactically correct sentences from (possibly different) subsets
of these phrases. We introduce a trigram constrained language model based on our knowledge about how the sentence descriptions are structured in the training set. With a
very constrained decoding scheme, sentences are inferred
with a beam search. Because these sentences are not con-

Phrase-based Image Captioning

ditioned to the given image (apart with the initial phrases
selection), a re-ranking is used to pick the sentence that is
closest to the sample image (according to the learned metric). The quality of our sentence generation is evaluated
on two very popular datasets for the task: Flickr30k (Hodosh et al., 2013) and the recently published COCO (Lin
et al., 2014). Using the popular BLEU score (Papineni
et al., 2002), our results are competitive with other recent
works. Our generated sentences also achieve a similar performance as humans on the BLEU metric.

trained to maximize the likelihood of the target description sentence given a training image. Karpathy & Fei-Fei
(2015) propose an approach that is a combination of CNN,
bidirectional RNN over sentences and a structured objective responsible for a multimodal embedding. They then
propose a second RNN architecture to generate new sentences. Similarly, Mao et al. (2015) and Donahue et al.
(2014) propose a system that uses a CNN to extract image
features and a RNN for sentences. The two networks interact with each other in a multimodal common layer.

The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents related works. Section 3 presents the analysis we conducted
to better understand the syntax of image descriptions. Section 4 describes the proposed phrase-based model. Section 5 introduces the sentence generation from the predicted phrases. Section 6 describes our experimental setup
and the results on the two datasets. Section 7 concludes.

Our model shares some similarities with these recent proposed approaches. We also use a pre-trained CNN to extract image features. However, thanks to the phrase-based
approach, our model does not rely on complex recurrent
networks for sentence generation, and we do not fine-tune
the image features.

2. Related Works
The classical approach to sentence generation is to pose the
problem as a retrieval problem: a given test image will be
described with the highest ranked annotation in the training set (Hodosh et al., 2013; Socher et al., 2014; Srivastava & Salakhutdinov, 2014). These matching methods
may not generate proper descriptions for a new combination of objects. Due to this limitation, several generative
approaches have been proposed. Many of them use syntactic and semantic constraints in the generation process (Yao
et al., 2010; Mitchell et al., 2012; Kuznetsova et al., 2012;
Kulkarni et al., 2013). These approaches benefit from visual recognition systems to infer words or phrases, but in
contrast to our work they do not leverage a multimodal metric between images and phrases.
More recently, automatic image sentence description approaches based on deep neural networks have emerged with
the release of new large datasets. As starting point, these
solutions use the rich representation of images generated
by Convolutional Neural Networks (LeCun et al., 1998)
(CNN) that were previously trained for object recognition
tasks. These CNN are generally followed by recurrent neural networks (RNN) in order to generate full sentence descriptions (Vinyals et al., 2014; Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015;
Donahue et al., 2014; Chen & Zitnick, 2015; Mao et al.,
2015; Venugopalan et al., 2014; Kiros et al., 2014). Among
these recent works, long short-term memory (LSTM) is often chosen as RNN. In such approaches, the key point is
to learn a common space between images and words or between images and sentences, i.e. a multimodal embedding.
Vinyals et al. (2014) consider the problem in a similar way
as a machine translation problem. The authors propose
an encoder/decoder (CNN/LSTM networks) system that is

As our approach, Fang et al. (2015) proposes to not use
recurrent networks for generating the sentences. Their solution can be divided into three steps: (i) a visual detector
for words that commonly occur are trained using multiple
instance learning, (ii) a set of sentences are generated using a Maximum-Entropy language model and (iii) the set
of sentences is re-ranked using sentence-level features and
a proposed deep multimodal similarity model. Our work
differs from this approach in two different important ways:
our model infers phrases present in the sentences instead of
words and we use a considerably simpler language model.

3. Syntax Analysis of Image Descriptions
The art of writing sentences can vary a lot according to the
domain. When reporting news or reviewing an item, not
only the choice of the words might vary, but also the general structure of the sentence. In this section, we wish to analyze the syntax of image descriptions to identify whether
images have their own structures. We therefore proceed to
an exploratory analysis of two recent datasets containing a
large amount of images with descriptions: Flickr30k (Hodosh et al., 2013) and COCO (Lin et al., 2014).
3.1. Datasets
The Flickr30k dataset contains 31,014 images where 1,014
images are for validation, 1,000 for testing and the rest for
training (i.e. 29,000 images). The COCO dataset contains
123,287 images, 82,783 training images and 40,504 validation images. The testing images has not yet been released. We thus use two sets of 5,000 images from the
validation images for validation and test, as in Karpathy &
Fei-Fei (2015)1 . In both datasets, images are given with
five (or six) sentence descriptions annotated using Amazon
1
Available at http://cs.stanford.edu/people/
karpathy/deepimagesent/

Phrase-based Image Captioning

15

Appareance frequencies (%)

0.6
●

0.5
10

0.4

●

●

5

●

0.3
●

●

Cumulative Distribution Function

60
50
30

40

Appareance frequencies (%)

0.7

●

NP
VP
PP

20

●
●
●

●

●

0.2
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

P
N
P N PP
N
P N PP P V NP
VP P N P O
N PP P V NP
P N P
N
P N PP P P NP O
PP P N P O
N VP P P NP
P N P O
N
VP P N
P
P
N VP P O
N P
P N
P N
VP P N PP P O
P
N P P P NP
P N P O
N
VP P N
P
VP
N PP P O
N NP P P NP
N
P N P O
P N
P P N
VP P
N P V P
N PP P NP P N O
P N P V P
N
PP P P P O
P
N
PP
N PP P NP
N NP P P NP O N O
P N P V P
VP P N P O
N VP P P NP
P N P O
N
PP P N
P
VP NP N PP P O
P
N O P NP
N P
P
N
P SB P N O
VP A VP P
O
N R V NP
P P
O N O
VP P
N O
P
O

N

0

P

VP

N

10

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6+

Figure 1. Statistics on the number of phrase chunks (NP, VP, PP)
per ground-truth descriptions in Flickr30k and COCO training
datasets.

Mechanical Turk (see Figure 3). This results in 559,113
sentences when combining both training datasets.
3.2. Chunking-based Approach
A quick overview over these sentence descriptions reveals
that they all share a common structure, usually describing
the different entities present in the image and how they interact between each other. This interaction among entities
is described as actions or relative position between different objects. The sentence can be short or long, but it generally respects this process. To confirm this claim and better
understand the description structures, we used a chunking
(also called shallow parsing) approach which identifies the
phrase chunks of a sentence (i.e., the non-recursive cores
of various phrase types in text). These chunks are usually
noun phrases (NP), verb phrases (VP) and prepositional
phrases (PP). We extract them from the training sentences
with the SENNA software2 . Pre-verbal and post-verbal adverb phrases are merged with verb phrases to limit the number of phrase types. Table 1 presents an example sentence
with its chunking analysis.
a man is grinding a ramp on a skateboard .
| {z } | {z } | {z } |{z} |
{z
} |{z}
NP
VP
NP PP
NP
O
Table 1. Chunking analysis of an image description.

Statistics reported in Figure 1 and Figure 2 confirm that
image descriptions possess a simple and distinct structure.
2

Available at http://ml.nec-labs.com/senna/

Figure 2. The 20 most frequent sentence structures in Flickr30k
and COCO training datasets. The black line is the appearance
frequency for each structure, the red line is the cumulative distribution.

These sentences do not have much variability. All the key
elements in a given image are usually described with a
noun phrase (NP). Interactions between these elements can
then be explained using prepositional phrases (PP) or verb
phrases (VP). A large majority of sentences contain from
two to four noun phrases. Two noun phrases then interact
using a verb or prepositional phrase. Describing an image
is therefore just a matter of identifying these chunks. We
thus propose to train a model which can predict the phrases
which are likely to be in a given image.

4. Phrase-based Model for Image
Descriptions
By leveraging previous works on word and image representations, we propose a simple model which can predict the
phrases that best describe a given image. For this purpose,
a metric between images and phrases is trained, as illustrated in Figure 3. The proposed architecture is then just a
low-rank bilinear model U T V .
4.1. Image Representations
For the representation of images, we choose to use a Convolutional Neural Network. CNN have been widely used in
different vision domains and are currently the state-of-theart in many object recognition tasks. We consider a CNN
that has been pre-trained for the task of object classification (Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014). We use a CNN solely
to the purpose of feature extraction, that is, no learning is

Phrase-based Image Captioning
a man
a skate board

NP
a wooden ramp

V

U

riding
is grinding
on
with

A man in a helment skateboarding before an audience.
Man riding on edge of an oval ramp with a skate board.
A man riding a skateboard up the side of a wooden ramp.
A man on a skateboard is doing a trick.
A man is grinding a ramp on a skateboard.

VP
PP

Figure 3. Schematic illustration of our phrase-based model for image descriptions.

done in the CNN layers.

tions:

4.2. Learning a Common Space for Image and Phrase
Representations
Let I be the set of training images, C the set of all phrases
used to describe I, and θ the trainable parameters of the
model. By representing each image i ∈ I with a vector
zi ∈ Rn thanks to the pre-trained CNN, we define a metric
between the image i and a phrase c as a bilinear operation:
fθ (c, i) = uTc V zi ,

(1)

with U = (uc1 , . . . , uc|C| ) ∈ Rm×|C| and V ∈ Rm×n being
the trainable parameters θ. Note that U T V could be a full
matrix, but a low-rank setting eases the capacity control.
4.3. Phrase Representations Initialization
Noun phrases or verb phrases are often a combination of
several words. Good word vector representations can be
obtained very efficiently with many different recent approaches (Mikolov et al., 2013b; Mnih & Kavukcuoglu,
2013; Pennington et al., 2014; Lebret & Collobert, 2015).
Mikolov et al. (2013a) also showed that simple vector addition can often produce meaningful results, such as king man + woman ≈ queen. By leveraging the ability of these
word vector representations to compose by simple summation, representations for phrases are easily computed with
an element-wise addition.
Each phrase c composed of K words wk is therefore represented by a vector xwk ∈ Rm thanks to a word representation model pre-trained on large unlabeled text corpora. A
vector representation uc for a phrase c = {w1 , . . . , wK }
is then calculated by averaging its word vector representa-

uc =

K
1 X
xwk .
K

(2)

k=1

Vector representations for all phrases c ∈ C can thus be obtained to initialized the matrix U ∈ Rm×|C| . V ∈ Rm×n
is initialized randomly and trained to encode images in the
same vector space than the phrases used for their descriptions.
4.4. Training with Negative Sampling
Each image i is described by a multitude of possible
phrases C i ⊆ C. We consider |C| classifiers attributing
a score for each phrase. We train our model to discriminate a target phrase cj from a set of negative phrases
ck ∈ C − ⊆ C, with ck 6= cj . With θ = {U, V }, we
minimize the following logistic loss function with respect
to θ:


X X 
−uT V z
θ 7→
log 1 + e cj i
i∈I cj ∈C i

+

X



T
log 1 + e+uck V zi . (3)

ck ∈C −

The model is trained using stochastic gradient descent. A
new set of negative phrases C − is randomly picked from
the training set at each iteration.

5. From Phrases to Sentence
After identifying the L most likely constituents cj in the
image i, we propose to generate sentences out of them.
From this set, l ∈ {1, . . . , L} phrases are used to compose
a syntactically correct description.

Phrase-based Image Captioning

5.1. Sentence Generation
Using a statistical language modeling framework, the likelihood of a certain sentence is given by:
P (c1 , c2 , . . . , cl ) =

l
Y

P (cj |c1 , . . . , cj−1 )

(4)

VP
c
start

c

NP

PP

j=1

Keeping this system as simple as possible and using the
second order Markov property, we approximate Equation 4
with a trigram language model:
P (c1 , c2 , . . . , cl ) ≈

l
Y

N

P (cj |cj−2 , cj−1 ) .

(5)

j=1

The best candidate corresponds to the sentence
P (c1 , c2 , . . . , cl ) which maximizes the likelihood of
Equation 5 over all the possible sizes of sentence. Because
we want to constrain the decoding algorithm to include
prior knowledge on chunking tags t ∈ {N P, V P, P P },
we rewrite Equation 5 as:
l X
Y
j=1

=

P (cj |tj = t, cj−2 , cj−1 )P (tj = t|cj−2 , cj−1 )

t

l
Y

P (cj |tj , cj−2 , cj−1 )P (tj |cj−2 , cj−1 ) .

(6)

j=1

Both conditions P (cj |tj , cj−2 , cj−1 ) and P (tj |cj−2 , cj−1 )
are probabilities estimated by counting trigrams in the
training datasets.
5.2. Sentence Decoding
At decoding time, we prune the graph of all possible sentences made out of the top L phrases with a beam search,
according to three heuristics: (i) we consider only the transitions which are likely to happen (we discard any sentence
which would have a trigram transition probability inferior
to 0.01). This thresholding helps to discard sentences that
are semantically incorrect; (ii) each predicted phrases cj
may appear only once3 ; (iii) we add syntactic constraints
which are illustrated in Figure 4. The last heuristic is based
on the analysis of syntax in Section 3. In Figure 2, we see
that a noun phrase is, in general, always followed by a verb
phrase or a prepositional phrase, and both are then followed
by another noun phrase. A large majority of the sentences
contain three noun phrases interleaved with verb phrases or
prepositional phrases. According the statistics reported in
Figure 1, sentences with two or four noun phrases are also
common, but sentences with more than four noun phrases
are marginal. We thus repeat this process N = {2, 3, 4}
times until reaching the end of a sentence (characterized by
a period).
3

.

This is easy to implement with a beam search, but intractable
with a full search.

Figure 4. The constrained language model for generating description given the predicted phrases for an image.

5.3. Sentence Re-ranking
For each test image i, the proposed model will generate a
set of M sentences. Sentence generation is not conditioned
on the image, apart from phrases which are selected beforehand. Some phrase sequences might be syntactically
good, but have low match with the image. Consider, for
instance, an image with a cat and a dog. Both sentences
“a cat sitting on a mat and a dog eating a bone” and “a
cat sitting on a mat” are correct, but the second is missing
an important part of the image. A ranking of the generated
sentences is therefore necessary to choose the one that has
the best match with the image.
Because a generated sentence is composed from l phrases
predicted by our system, we simply average the phrase
scores given by Equation 1. For a generated sentence s
composed of l phrases cj , a score between s and i is calculated as:
1X
fθ (cj , i) .
(7)
l c ∈s
j

The best candidate is the sentence which has the highest
score out of the M generated sentences. This ranking helps
the system to chose the sentence which is closer to the sample image.

6. Experiments
6.1. Experimental Setup
6.1.1. F EATURE S ELECTION
Following Karpathy & Fei-Fei (2015), the image features
are extracted using VGG CNN (Simonyan & Zisserman,
2014). This model generates image representations of dimension 4096 from RGB input images.
For each training set, only phrases occurring at least ten
times are considered. This threshold is chosen to fulfil two
objectives: (i) limit the number of phrases C and therefore

Phrase-based Image Captioning

the size of the matrix U and (ii) exclude rare phrases to better generalize the descriptions. Statistics on the number of
phrases are reported in Table 2. For Flickr30k, this thresh-

Noun Phrase (NP)
Verb Phrase (VP)
Prepositional Phrase (PP)
Total |C|

Flickr30k
4818
2109
128

COCO
8982
3083
189

7055

12254

Table 2. Statistics of phrases appearing at least ten times.

old covers about 81% of NP, 83% of VP and 99% of PP. For
COCO, it covers about 73% of NP, 75% of VP and 99%
of PP. Phrase representations are then computed by averaging vector representations of their words. We obtained
word representations from the Hellinger PCA of a word cooccurrence matrix, following the method described in Lebret & Collobert (2015). The word co-occurrence matrix
is built over the entire English Wikipedia4 , with a symmetric context window of ten words coming from the 10,000
most frequent words. Words, and therefore also phrases,
are represented in 400-dimensional vectors.
6.1.2. L EARNING THE M ULTIMODAL M ETRIC
The parameters θ are V ∈ R400×4096 (initialized randomly) and U ∈ R400×|C| (initialized with the phrase representations) which are tuned on the validation datasets.
They are trained with 15 randomly chosen negative samples and a learning rate set to 0.00025. It takes 2.5 hours
on single CPU (Intel i7 4930K 3.4 GHz) to train on the
COCO training dataset.
6.1.3. G ENERATING S ENTENCES FROM THE
P REDICTED P HRASES
Transition probabilities for our constrained language model
(see Figure 4) are calculated independently for each training set. No smoothing has been used in the experiments.
Concerning the set of top-ranked phrases for a given test
image, we select only the top five predicted verb phrases
and the top five predicted prepositional phrases. Since the
average number of noun phrases is higher than for the two
other types of phrases (see Figure 1), more noun phrases
are needed. The top twenty predicted noun phrases are thus
selected.
6.2. Experimental Results
As a first evaluation, we consider the task of retrieving the
ground-truth phrases from test image descriptions. Results
4

Available at http://download.wikimedia.org. We
took the January 2014 version.

reported in Table 3 show that our system achieves a recall
of around 50% on this task on the test set of both datasets,
assuming the threshold considered for each type of phrase
(see 6.1.3). Note that this task is extremely difficult, as semantically similar phrases (the women / women / the little
girls) are classified separately. Despite the possible number
of noun phrases being higher, results in Table 3 reveal that
noun phrases are better retrieved than verb phrases. This
shows that our system is able to detect different objects in
the image. However, finding the right verb phrase seems
to be more difficult. A possible explanation could be that
there exists a wide choice of verb phrases to describe interactions between the noun phrases. For instance, we see
in Figure 3 that two annotators have used the same noun
phrases (a man, a skateboard and a (wooden) ramp) to
describe the scene, but they have then chosen a different
verb phrase to link them (riding versus is grinding). Therefore, we suspect that a low recall for verb phrases does not
necessarily mean that the predictions are wrong. Finding
the right prepositional phrase seems, on the contrary, much
easier. The high recall for prepositional phrase can be explained by much lower variability of this type of phrase
compared to the two others (see Table 2).

Noun Phrase (NP)
Verb Phrase (VP)
Prepostional Phrase (PP)
Total

Flickr30k
38.14
20.61
81.70

COCO
45.44
27.83
84.49

44.92

52.49

Table 3. Recall on phrase retrieval. For each test image, we take
the top 20 predicted NP, the top 5 predicted VP, and the top 5
predicted PP.

As a second evaluation, we consider the task of generating full descriptions. We measure the quality of the generated sentences using the popular, yet controversial, BLEU
score (Papineni et al., 2002). Table 4 shows our sentence
generation results on the two datasets considered. BLEU
scores are reported up to 4-gram. Human agreement scores
are computed by comparing the first ground-truth description against the four others5 . For comparison, we include
results from recently proposed models. Our model, despite
being simpler, achieves similar results to state of the art results. It is interesting to note that our results are very close
to the human agreement scores.
We show examples of full automatic generated sentences in
Figure 5. The simple language model used is able to generate sentences that are in general syntactically correct. Our
5

For all models, BLEU scores are computed against five reference sentences which give a slight advantage compared to human
scores.

Phrase-based Image Captioning

Flickr30K

COCO

Human agreement

B-1
0.55

B-2
0.35

B-3
0.23

B-4
0.15

B-1
0.68

B-2
0.45

B-3
0.30

B-4
0.20

Mao et al. (2015)
Karpathy & Fei-Fei (2015)
Vinyals et al. (2014)
Donahue et al. (2014)
Fang et al. (2015)
Our model

0.60
0.57
0.66
0.59
0.60

0.41
0.37
0.42
0.39
0.37

0.28
0.24
0.28
0.25
0.22

0.19
0.16
0.18
0.16
0.14

0.67
0.62
0.67
0.63
0.73

0.49
0.45
0.44
0.50

0.35
0.32
0.30
0.34

0.25
0.23
0.21
0.26
0.23

Table 4. Comparison between human agreement scores, state of the art models and our model on both datasets. Note that there are slight
variations between the test sets chosen in each paper.
PHRASES

model produces sensible descriptions with variable complexity for different test samples. Due to the generative aspect of the model, it can occur that the sentence generated is
very different from the ground-truth and still provides a descent description. The last row of Figure 5 illustrates failure
samples. We can see in these failure samples that our system has however outputted relevant phrases. There is still
room for improvement for generating the final description.
We deliberately choose a simple language model to show
that competitive results can be achieved with a simple approach. A more complex language model could probably
avoid these failure samples by considering a larger context.
The probability for a dog to stand on top of a wave is obviously very low, but this kind of mistake cannot be detected
with a simple trigram language model.

NEAREST NEIGHBORS
#

A GREY CAT

HOME PLATE

A HALF PIPE

1
2
3
4
10
1
4
6
9
10
1
2
5
9
10

BEFORE

AFTER

A GREY DOG

A GRAY CAT

A GREY AND BLACK CAT

A GREY AND BLACK CAT

A GRAY CAT

A BROWN CAT

A GREY ELEPHANT

A GREY AND WHITE CAT

A YELLOW CAT

GREY AND WHITE CAT

A HOME PLATE

A HOME PLATE

A PLATE

HOME BASE

ANOTHER PLATE

THE PITCH

A RED PLATE

THE BATTER

A DINNER PLATE

A BASEBALL PITCH

A PIPE

A PIPE

A HALF

THE RAMP

A SMALL CLOCK

A HAND RAIL

A LARGE CLOCK

A SKATE BOARD RAMP

A SMALL PLATE

AN EMPTY POOL

6.3. Diversity of Image Descriptions
In contrast to RNN-based models, our model is not trained
to match a given image i with its ground-truth descriptions s, i.e., to give P (s|i). Because our model outputs
instead a set of phrases, this is not really surprising that
only 1% of our generated descriptions are in the training set
for Flickr30k, and 9.7% for COCO. While a RNN-based
model is generative, it might easily overfit a small training data. Vinyals et al. (2014) report, for instance, that the
generated sentence is present in the training set 80% of the
time. Our model therefore offers a good alternative with the
possibility of producing unseen descriptions with a combination of phrases from the training set.
6.4. Phrase Representation Fine-Tuning
Before training the model, the matrix U is initialized with
phrase representations obtained from the whole English
Wikipedia. This corpus of unlabeled text is well structured
and large enough to provide good word vector representations, which can then produce good phrase representations.
However, the content of Wikipedia is clearly different from

Table 5. Examples of three noun phrases from the COCO dataset
with five of their nearest neighbors before and after learning.

the content of the image descriptions. Some words used
for describing images might be used in different contexts
in Wikipedia, which can lead to out-of-domain representations for certain phrases. This becomes thus crucial to
adapt these phrase representations by fine-tuning the matrix
U during the training6 . Some examples of noun phrases are
reported in Table 5 with their nearest neighbors before and
after the training. These confirm the importance of finetuning to incorporate visual features. In Wikipedia, cat
seems to occur in the same context than dog or other animals. When looking at the nearest neighbors of a phrase
such as a grey cat, other grey animals arise. After training on images, the word cat becomes the important feature
of that phrase. And we see that the nearest neighbors are
6

Experiments with a fixed U phrase representations matrix
significantly hurt the general performance. We observe about
a 50% decrease in both datasets with the BLEU metric. Since
the number of trainable parameters is reduced, the capacity of V
should be increased to guarantee a fair comparison.

Phrase-based Image Captioning

A man riding skis on a snow covered ski slope.

A man is doing skateboard tricks on a ramp.

The girl with blue hair stands under the umbrella.

NP: a man, skis, the snow, a person, a woman, a snow covered slope,
a slope, a snowboard, a skier, man.
VP: wearing, riding, holding, standing on, skiing down.
PP: on, in, of, with, down.

NP: a skateboard, a man, a trick, his skateboard, the air, a
skateboarder, a ramp, a skate board, a person, a woman.
VP: doing, riding, is doing, performing, flying through.
PP: on, of, in, at, with.

NP: a woman, an umbrella, a man, a person, a girl, umbrellas, that, a
little girl, a cell phone.
VP: holding, wearing, is holding, holds, carrying.
PP: with, on, of, in, under.

A man wearing skis on the snow.

A man riding a skateboard on a ramp.

A woman is holding an umbrella.

A slice of pizza sitting on top of a white plate.

A baseball player swinging a bat on a field.

NP: a plate, a white plate, a table, pizza, it, a pizza, food, a sandwich,
top, a close.
VP: topped with, has, is, sitting on, is on.
PP: of, on, with, in, up.

A bunch of kites flying in the sky on the beach.

NP: the ball, a game, a baseball player, a man, a tennis court, a ball,
home plate, a baseball game, a batter, a field.
VP: swinging, to hit, playing, holding, is swinging.
PP: on, during, in, at, of.

NP: the beach, a beach, a kite, kites, the ocean, the water, the sky,
people, a sandy beach, a group.
VP: flying, flies, is flying, flying in, are.
PP: on, of, with, in, at.

A table with a plate of pizza on a white plate.

A baseball player swinging a bat on a baseball field.

People flying kites on the beach.

People gather around a truck parked on a boat.

A person on a surf board in the ocean.

A cat sitting in a chair staring at a plate on a table.

NP:a man, a bench, a boat, a woman, a person, luggage, that, a train,
water, the water.
VP: sitting on, carrying, riding, sitting in, sits on.
PP: of, on, with, in, next to.

A man sitting on a bench with a woman carrying luggage.

NP: a dog, a wave, a person, the water, a man, the ocean, top, that,
the snow, a surfboard.
VP: riding, standing on, wearing, laying on, sitting on.
PP: on, of, in, with, near.

NP: a table, top, a desk, a cat, front, it, that, a laptop, a laptop
computer, the table.
VP: sitting on, is, sitting in, sitting next to, has.
PP: of, on, with, in, next to.

A dog standing on top of a wave on the ocean.

A cat sitting on top of a desk with a laptop.

Figure 5. Quantitative results for images on the COCO dataset. Ground-truth annotation (in blue), the NP, VP and PP predicted from the
model and generated annotation (in black) are shown for each image. The last row are failure samples.

now cats with different colours. In some cases, averaging
word vectors to represent phrases is not enough to capture
the semantic meaning. Fine-tuning is thus also important
to better learn specific phrases. Images related to baseball
games, for example, have enabled the phrase home plate to
be better defined. This is also true for the phrase a half pipe
with images about skateboarding. This leads to interesting
phrase representations, grounded in the visual world, which
could be possibly used in natural language applications in
future work.

7. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a simple model that is able to infer different phrases from image samples. From the phrases

predicted, our model is able to automatically generate sentences using a statistical language model. We show that the
problem of sentence generation can be effectively achieved
without the use of complex recurrent networks. Our algorithm, despite being simpler than state-of-the-art models,
achieves similar results on this task. Also, our model generate new sentences which are not generally present in training set. Future research directions will go towards leveraging unsupervised data and more complex language models
to improve sentence generation. Another interest is assessing the impact of visually grounded phrase representations
into existing natural language processing systems.

Phrase-based Image Captioning

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the HASLER foundation
through the grant “Information and Communication Technology for a Better World 2020” (SmartWorld).

References
Chen, X. and Zitnick, C. L. Minds Eye: A Recurrent Visual
Representation for Image Caption Generation. In IEEE
International Concference on Computer Vision and Patter Recognition (CVPR), 2015.
Donahue, J., Hendricks, L. A., Guadarrama, S., Rohrbach,
M., Venugopalan, S., Saenko, K., and Darrell, T.
Long-term Recurrent Convolutional Networks for Visual Recognition and Description.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1411.4389, 2014.
Fang, H., Gupta, S., Iandola, F., Srivastava, R., Deng, L.,
Dollár, P., Gao, J., He, X., Mitchell, M., Platt, J., Zitnick,
C. L., and Zweig, G. From captions to visual concepts
and back. In IEEE International Concference on Computer Vision and Patter Recognition (CVPR), 2015.
Hodosh, M., Young, P., and Hockenmaier, J. Framing
image description as a ranking task: data, models and
evaluation metrics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 2013.
Karpathy, A. and Fei-Fei, L. Deep Visual-Semantic Alignments for Generating Image Descriptions. In IEEE International Concference on Computer Vision and Patter
Recognition (CVPR), 2015.
Kiros, R., Salakhutdinov, R., and Zemel, R. S. Unifying Visual-Semantic Embeddings with Multimodal Neural Language Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.2539,
2014.
Kulkarni, G., Premraj, V., Dhar, S., Li, Siming, Choi, Yejin,
Berg, A. C., and Berg, T. L. Baby Talk: Understanding
and Generating Simple Image Descriptions. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35
(12):2891–2903, 2013.
Kuznetsova, P., Ordonez, V., Berg, A. C., Berg, T. L., and
Choi, Y. Collective Generation of Natural Image Descriptions. In Proceedings of the 50th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pp. 359–368. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2012.
Lebret, R. and Collobert, R. Rehabilitation of count-based
models for word vector representations. In Gelbukh,
Alexander (ed.), Computational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, volume 9041 of Lecture Notes in

Computer Science, pp. 417–429. Springer International
Publishing, 2015.
LeCun, Y., Bottou, L., Bengio, Y., and Haffner, P. Gradientbased learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE, 1998.
Lin, T.-Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P.,
Ramanan, D., Dollár, P., and Zitnick, C. L. Microsoft
COCO: Common Objects in Context. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2014, pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014.
Mao, J., Xu, W., Yang, Y., Wang, J., Huang, Z., and Yuille,
A. L. Deep Captioning with Multimodal Recurrent Neural Networks (m-RNN). In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. Efficient
Estimation of Word Representations in Vector Space.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013a.
Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and
Dean, J. Distributed Representations of Words and
Phrases and their Compositionality. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pp. 3111–3119.
2013b.
Mitchell, M., Han, X., Dodge, J., Mensch, A., Goyal,
A., Berg, A., Yamaguchi, K., Berg, T., Stratos, K., and
Daumé, III, H. Midge: Generating Image Descriptions
from Computer Vision Detections. In Proceedings of the
13th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 747–756. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2012.
Mnih, A. and Kavukcuoglu, Koray. Learning word embeddings efficiently with noise-contrastive estimation. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pp.
2265–2273. 2013.
Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., and Zhu, W.-J. BLEU:
A Method for Automatic Evaluation of Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting on
association for computational linguistics, pp. 311–318.
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2002.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., and Manning, C. D. GloVe:
Global Vectors for Word Representation. In Proceedings
of the Empiricial Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2014), volume 12, 2014.
Simonyan, K. and Zisserman, A. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. CoRR, 2014.
Socher, R., Karpathy, A., Le, Q. V., Manning, C. D., and
Ng, A. Y. Grounded Compositional Semantics for Finding and Describing Images with Sentences. Transactions
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 2:207–
218, 2014.

Phrase-based Image Captioning

Srivastava, N. and Salakhutdinov, R. Multimodal Learning
with Deep Boltzmann Machines. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 2014.
Venugopalan, S., Xu, H., Donahue, J., Rohrbach, M.,
Mooney, R. J., and Saenko, K. Translating Videos to
Natural Language Using Deep Recurrent Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.4729, 2014.
Vinyals, O., Toshev, A., Bengio, S., and Erhan, D. Show
and tell: A neural image caption generator. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1411.4555, 2014.
Yao, B. Z., Yang, X., Lin, L., Lee, M. W., and Zhu, S. C.
I2T: Image Parsing to Text Description. Proceedings of
the IEEE, 98(8):1485–1508, 2010.

