An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on
L1 -Regularized Approximate Linear Programming Approximation Accuracy

Gavin Taylor
Connor Geer
David Piekut
United States Naval Academy, 572M Holloway Rd., Stop 9F, Annapolis, MD 21402-5002

Abstract
Recent interest in the use of L1 regularization in
the use of value function approximation includes
Petrik et al.’s introduction of L1 -Regularized Approximate Linear Programming (RALP). RALP
is unique among L1 -regularized approaches in
that it approximates the optimal value function
using off-policy samples. Additionally, it produces policies which outperform those of previous methods, such as LSPI. RALP’s value function approximation quality is affected heavily by
the choice of state-relevance weights in the objective function of the linear program, and by the
distribution from which samples are drawn; however, there has been no discussion of these considerations in the previous literature. In this paper, we discuss and explain the effects of choices
in the state-relevance weights and sampling distribution on approximation quality, using both
theoretical and experimental illustrations. The
results provide insight not only onto these effects,
but also provide intuition into the types of MDPs
which are especially well suited for approximation with RALP.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the Reinforcement Learning community
has paid considerable attention to creating value function
approximation approaches which perform automated feature selection while approximating a value function (Kolter
& Ng, 2009; Johns et al., 2010; Mahadevan & Liu,
2012; Liu et al., 2012). This approach frees researchers
from hand-selecting and -tuning feature sets, while greatly
increasing approximation accuracy. One of these apProceedings of the 31st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP volume 32.

TAYLOR @ USNA . EDU

proaches, L1 -Regularized Approximate Linear Programming (RALP) (Petrik et al., 2010; Taylor & Parr, 2012) is
unique in that it results in an approximation of the optimal
value function and makes use of off-policy samples.
However, important aspects of RALP have not been fully
explored or explained. In particular, the objective function
of the linear program offers an opportunity to create a better approximation of the value function in some regions of
the state space at the expense of others. Optimal policies
of many realistic reinforcement learning problems heavily
traffic some parts of the state space while avoiding others,
making an understanding of this flexibility useful.
Therefore, in Section 4, we derive a new error bound for
the RALP approximation, which is tighter than those presented by Petrik et al. (2010) and provides new insight into
the result of changing the state-relevance weights in the objective function. In addition, this bound provides an insight
into the types of MDPs particularly well suited to the RALP
approach. Finally, this section provides evidence that rather
than weighting all states equally, as was done by Petrik et
al. (2010) and Taylor and Parr (2012), states should instead
be weighted in proportion to the stationary distribution under the optimal policy.
Additionally, if the sampling distribution is not uniform
across the state space, the approximation can be heavily
affected. In realistic domains, sampling is rarely uniform.
Therefore, for RALP to be appropriate for these domains,
it is important to address this lack of analysis and understand how the approximation is likely to be altered due to
the problem’s available sampling scheme.
Section 5 then discusses the impact on the approximation if
learning is performed using samples drawn other than uniformly from the state space. We demonstrate that sampling
from a distribution acts as a de facto alteration of the objective function. We also discuss the effects of sampling
distributions in light of the bounds from Section 4.
The intuition provided by Sections 4 and 5 are then demon-

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

strated experimentally in Section 6. Using a simple, easily
visualized domain, we demonstrate the effect of the various
parameters on approximation quality.

2. Notation and Problem Statement
In this section, we formally define Markov decision processes and linear value function approximation. A Markov
decision process (MDP) is a tuple (S, A, P, R, γ), where S
is the measurable, possibly infinite set of states, and A is
the finite set of actions. P ∶ S × S × A ↦ [0, 1] is the transition function, where P(s′ ∣s, a) represents the probability
of transitioning from state s to state s′ , given action a. The
function R ∶ S ↦ R is the reward function, and γ, a number between 0 and 1, is the discount factor, representing the
comparative desire for reward at the current time step to the
desire for reward at the next time step.
We are concerned with finding a value function V that maps
each state s ∈ S to the expected total γ-discounted reward
for the process. Value functions can be useful in creating or
analyzing a policy π ∶ S × A → [0, 1] such that for all s ∈ S,
∑a∈A π(s, a) = 1. The transition and reward functions for
a given policy are denoted by Pπ and Rπ . We denote the
Bellman operator for a given policy as Tπ , and the max
Bellman operator simply as T. That is, for some state s ∈ S:
Tπ V(s) = R(s) + γ ∫ P(ds′ ∣s, π(s))V(s′ )
S

TV(s) = max Tπ V(s).
π∈Π

We additionally denote the Bellman operator for selecting
a particular action a as
Ta V(s) = R(s) + ∫ P(ds′ ∣s, a)V(s′ ).
S

The optimal value function V ∗ satisfies TV ∗ (s) = V ∗ (s)
for all s ∈ S.
For simplicity, in this paper we will assume no noise exists in the MDP; results can be easily extended to noisy
domains using Taylor and Parr’s (2012) approach of local
smoothing.

a vector Φ(s) of features. The rows of the basis matrix Φ
correspond to Φ(s), and the approximation space is generated by the columns of the matrix. That is, the basis matrix
Φ, and the approximate value function V̂ are represented
as:
− Φ(s1 ) −
Φ=(
)
V̂ = Φw.
⋮
This form of linear representation allows for the calculation
of an approximate value function in a lower-dimensional
space, which provides significant computational benefits
over using a complete basis; if the number of features is
small and the environment is noisy, this framework can also
guard against overfitting any noise in the samples.
If we define Φ to be overcomplete, with potentially far
more features than sampled states, then to receive the above
benefits we must perform feature selection. In this process,
a few features are chosen from the set, the span of which
will represent the available linear approximation space. We
can use L1 regularization to calculate a sparse w, in which
nearly all features receive a weight of 0, thereby performing automated feature selection.

3. Previous Work
RALP was introduced by Petrik et al. (2010) to extend the
capabilities of the linear programming approach to value
function approximation (d’Epenoux, 1963; Schweitzer &
Seidmann, 1985; de Farias & Van Roy, 2003). Given a set
of samples Σ, the linear program is defined as follows:
min
w

s.t.

ρ T Φw
Tσa Φ(σs )w ≤ Φ(σs )w ∀σ ∈ Σ
∥w∥−1 ≤ ψ,

(1)

where ρ is a distribution, which we call the state-relevance
weights, in keeping with the (unregularized) Approximate
Linear Programming (ALP) terminology of de Farias and
Van Roy (2003). ∥w∥−1 is the L1 norm of the vector consisting of all weights excepting the one corresponding to
the constant feature.

Sets of samples, therefore, are defined as Σ ⊆
{(s, a, r, s′ ∣s, s′ ∈ S, a ∈ A}, where s′ is the state the agent
arrived at given that it started in state s and took action a,
and r = R(s). An individual sample in the set Σ will be denoted σ, and an element of a sample σ will be denoted with
superscripts; that is, the s component of a σ = (s, a, r, s′ )
sample will be denoted σs .

This final constraint, which contributes L1 regularization,
provides several benefits. First, regularization in general
ensures the linear program is bounded, and produces a
smoother value function. Second, L1 regularization in particular produces a sparse solution, producing automated
feature selection from an overcomplete feature set. Finally, the sparsity results in few of the constraints being
active, speeding the search for a solution by a linear program solver, particularly if constraint generation is used.

We focus on linear value function approximation for discounted infinite-horizon problems, in which the value function is represented as a linear combination of possibly nonlinear basis functions (vectors). For each state s, we define

Other techniques have used L1 regularization in similar
ways. LARS-TD (Kolter & Ng, 2009) and LC-MPI (Johns
et al., 2010) both approximate the fixed point of the L1 regularized LSTD problem. Mahadevan and Liu (2012)

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

introduced the use of mirror descent, which has a computation complexity which allows it to be better suited than
many other approaches for online reinforcement learning
problems. These above approaches are most reliable when
samples are collected on-policy. Liu et al. (2012) introduced RO-TD, which converges to an approximation of the
value function of a given policy, even when trained on offpolicy samples.

choose a solution which tightens constraints in that portion
of the space over others. In realistic settings, it can be difficult to sample uniformly, making it especially important to
understand the effect of other sampling distributions on the
resulting approximate value function.

In contrast to the above approaches, RALP provides an approximation to the value function of the optimal policy,
even when samples are drawn from non-optimal or random policies. Approximations produced by RALP have
bounded error, and have performed well experimentally
in comparison to other approaches. Finally, in noisy domains, the well-known weakness of linear programming
approaches to value function approximation can be mitigated or eliminated using local smoothing (Taylor & Parr,
2012).

4. State-Relevance Weights

This previous work on RALP has largely ignored the staterelevance weights ρ in the objective function, setting ρ = 1
without discussion. However, a change in the objective
function would obviously affect the solution of the linear
program. In certain practical situations this would be useful
to understand. For example, consider the task of calculating
a value function for an aircraft in flight. The space of possible flight attitudes, velocities, etc. is very large. However,
the percentage of this space trafficked in non-catastrophic
flight is small; it is likely worthwhile to improve the approximation quality in this relevant portion, at the expense
of accuracy in the remainder of the space.
Some previous results exist regarding the effects of changing the state-relevance weights in the closely-related
ALP (de Farias & Van Roy, 2003). However, the assumptions and types of appropriate problems are very different
between ALP and RALP, making these previous results insufficient. First, ALP assumes a sample is drawn from every state-action pair, an assumption which is not required
for RALP. This means it was not necessary with ALP to
consider the behavior of the approximation between samples or in a continuous space. Furthermore, it was not necessary to consider the effects of sampling distributions at
all. This assumption was later weakened by a followup paper (de Farias & Van Roy, 2004), but not to a degree necessary for large or continuous problems, particularly when
large numbers of samples are not available. The second
difference is ALP is unregularized, simplifying the definition of the feasible space of the linear program. Despite
these differences, these previous results will serve as a useful guide.
Additionally, previous work does not cover the effects of
sampling schemes on RALP. If states are sampled heavily
in one portion of the state space, the linear program will

The remainder of this document fills in these gaps in the
previous work.

The theoretical results presented on RALP in the literature
thus far offer no insights into the behavior of the approximation as the state-relevance weights are altered. Therefore, it is necessary to derive new bounds for RALP which
contain ρ to understand its effects.
The approach we take follows the example of a proof introduced by de Farias and Van Roy (2003) to bound the ALP
approximation, but we extend it match the weaker assumptions of RALP, along with the requirement that the weights
be L1 regularized.
We begin by defining the relevant notation. In the following definitions, we will use R+ to refer to the set of nonnegative real numbers.
Definition 1 We introduce an operator H, defined by
(HL)(s) = max ∫ p(s′ ∣s, a)L(s′ ) ds′ ,
a∈A

S

for all L ∶ S → R+ .
Therefore, (HL)(s) represents the expected value of L of
the next state if actions are chosen to maximize L.
Definition 2 A non-negative function L ∶ S → R+ is a Lyapunov function if there exists a subset of states B and a
β L < 1 such that for all s ∈ S ∖ B, γ(HL)(s) ≤ β L L(s).
For an example of a Lyapunov function defined over a
MDP, consider the simple case of a random walk along the
non-negative number line, so that s ∈ Z+ . Assume a single
action, in which the probability
p = p(st+1 = max(m − 1, 0)∣st = m) > 0.5
and
p(st+1 = m + 1∣st = m) = 1 − p.
If L(s) = s and B = {0}, then L is a valid Lyapunov function, because L(s) is expected to decrease for all s ≠ 0.
Lyapunov functions are often used to prove stability of
Markov processes. Definition 2 differs from the definition
commonly used for stability analysis in a few ways. First,
in stability analysis, it is required that S be countable, and

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

that B be finite. We have made neither of these assumptions, though our bounds will be tightest when B is small.
The second difference is we have added a multiplicative
term of γ. Because of these differences, a Lyapunov function as defined in Definition 2 may not strictly evidence
stability.
Besides stability analysis, Lyapunov functions have also
previously appeared in Reinforcement Learning literature,
though in different contexts from our application (Perkins
& Barto, 2003; Rohanimanesh et al., 2004).
In the remainder of this section, we will occasionally refer to the weighted max-norm, where for a vector U and
a function F, ∥U∥∞,F = maxi ∣U(si ) ⋅ F(si )∣, and the
weighted L1 norm, where ∥U∥1,F = ∑i ∣U(si ) ⋅ F(si )∣.
We will start with the following Lemma. To conserve
space, and because the proof is similar to one presented
by de Farias and Van Roy (2003), we reserve the proof for
the technical report associated with this paper (Taylor et al.,
2014).
Lemma 1 Assume samples have been drawn from every
possible state-action pair. Let W = {w ∶ ∥w∥−1 ≤ ψ}, and
let w∗ = minw∈W ∥V ∗ − Φw∥∞ . Additionally, for a given
Lyapunov function Φw L , let
w̄ = w∗ + ∥V ∗ − Φw∗ ∥∞,

1
Φw L

(

2
− 1) w L .
1 − β Φw L

If a Lyapunov function Φw L is constructed such that w̄ ∈
W, then,
∥V ∗ − Φw̃∥1,ρ ≤

2ρ T Φw L
min ∥V ∗ − Φw∥∞, 1 .
Φw L
1 − β Φw L w∈W

We note that proving the existence of a Lyapunov function
as required in the above lemma is trivial. First we construct
a weight vector w L with all zeros but for a positive weight
corresponding to the bias feature; this results in Φw L being
a valid Lyapunov function. Second, we note that in this
case ∥w̄∥−1 = ∥w∗ ∥−1 , meeting the requirement that w̄ ∈
W.
We must now remove the assumption that a sample exists
for every state-action pair. To enable us to bound the behavior of the value function between samples, we make the
following assumption, similar to the sufficient sampling assumption made by Petrik et al. (2010):
Assumption 1 Assume sufficient sampling, that is, for all
s ∈ S and a ∈ A, there exists a σ ∈ Σ such that σ a = a and:
∥φ(σs ) − φ(s)∥∞ ≤δφ
′

∥R(σs ) − R(s)∥∞ ≤δR

∥p(s ∣σ , a) − p(s′ ∣s, a)∥∞ ≤δP ∀s′ ∈ S
s

This assumption is not unrealistic. For example, if the reward function, basis functions, and transition functions are
Lipschitz continuous, then appropriate values of δφ , δR , and
δP are easily calculated given the greatest distance between
any point in the state space and a sampled point.
We describe the maximum difference between the RALP
solution and the true solution by using the limits from Assumption 1 to demonstrate the following Lemma:
Lemma 2 Let M1 be an MDP with optimal value function
V1∗ , and let Σ be an incomplete set of samples drawn from
M1 such that not all state-action pairs are sampled, but
Assumption 1 is fulfilled. Therefore, the RALP for M1 has
the constraint Tσa Φ(σs )w ≤ Φ(σs )w for all σ ∈ Σ, and
the bounded L1 constraint, but is missing all other possible
RALP constraints.
There exists an MDP M2 with an optimal value function
V2∗ , identical in every way to M1 but for the reward function, such that the RALP solution with no missing constraints is equal to the RALP solution constructed on Σ,
2(δ ψ+δR +δP ψ)
.
and ∥V1∗ − V2∗ ∥∞ ≤ φ 1−γ
Proof Sketch: We first show that if R1 and R2 are the
respective reward functions of M1 and M2 ,
∥R1 − R2 ∥∞ ≤ 2(δφ ψ + δR + δP ψ).
We then show that if ∥R1 − R2 ∥∞ ≤ δ,
∥V1∗ − V2∗ ∥∞ ≤

δ
.
1−γ

We leave the details of the proof for the technical report (Taylor et al., 2014).
We are now prepared to present the first result of this paper.
Theorem 1 Let Φw L be a Lyapunov function as required
by Lemma 1. Define Σ, MDPs M1 and M2 and their respective optimal value functions V1∗ and V2∗ as in Lemma
2. Define e p = δφ ψ + δR + δP ψ. Let w̃ be the RALP solution
to M1 .
∥V1∗ − Φw̃∥1,ρ ≤

2e p
2ρ T Φw L
min ∥V ∗ − Φw∥∞, 1 +
.
Φw L
1 − β Φw L w∈W 2
1−γ

Proof: Because w̃ is an optimal solution given all samples from M2 , Lemmas 1 and 2 allow us
∥V2∗ − Φw̃∥1,ρ ≤

2ρ T Φw L
min ∥V ∗ − Φw∥∞, 1 .
Φw L
1 − β Φw L w∈W 2

Additionally, Lemma 2 gave us ∥V1∗ − V2∗ ∥∞ ≤

2e p
1−γ .

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

Because ρ is a probability distribution,
∥V1∗ − V2∗ ∥1,ρ ≤ ∥V1∗ − V2∗ ∥∞ ≤

2e p
.
1−γ

mal policy may be an advantageous setting for ρ. This evidence meshes well with the intuition that greater accuracy
is most useful in frequently-visited states.

Due to the triangle inequality, Theorem 1 follows.

5. Sampling Distribution

4.1. Discussion

Imagine an MDP with a small finite state space and a single action. Ideal sampling would provide a single sample from each state, giving us an objective function of
∑s∈S ρ(s)Φ(s)w. However, if sampling from a distribution across the state space, this ideal situation would be
unlikely; some states would go unsampled, while others
would be sampled multiple times. Because the objective
function is defined on samples, this means states that were
sampled multiple times would appear in the objective function multiple times, causing the linear program to tighten
constraints at those states at the expense of accuracy in
other states.

This bound is not only tighter than those presented in previous literature, but also allows us to analyze the RALP
approximation quality in new ways. First, we can observe
which Lyapunov functions would result in a better approximation, and discuss the characteristics of MDPs which allow for those Lyapunov functions, and therefore lend themselves particularly well to value function approximation by
RALP. Second, as ρ now appears in our bound, the bound
provides a way of relating our choice of ρ to approximation
quality, allowing for more intuitive and successful parameter assignments. We address these in turn.
The Lyapunov function Φw L appears in the first term of our
bound in three places, namely the dot product with ρ, the
definition of β Φw L , and in the norm defining the “optimal”
w to which we compare our approximation. We first note
that the bound becomes smaller as β Φw L decreases. This
suggests that the more stable the MDP, the better RALP
can approximate the value function.
This interpretation of Theorem 1 leads to other intuitive explanations. Consider an MDP with only L(s) = 1 ∀s ∈ S
as a Lyapunov function. Now assume two nearby samples,
one where a “good” action is taken, in the direction of positive reward, and another where a “bad” action is taken, in
the direction of negative reward. When the linear program
is solved, due to the proximity of the two samples, the constraint corresponding to the “bad” sample is nearly certain
to be loose, and may as well be removed. However, if the
MDP is highly stable, then these two extremely different
samples would be unlikely, and both constraints are candidates for being tight. Therefore, more samples from an
MDP with a small β L are likely to be involved in defining the feasible space, potentially resulting in an improved
approximation.
The appearance of the Lyapunov function in the norm of
the bound indicates the bound is tighter when the feature
space Φ allows for a close approximation in areas where
the Lyapunov function is small. Bertsimas et al. (1998)
demonstrated that a small Lyapunov function value correlates in expectation with a higher probability in the stationary distribution of a Markov chain. This is particularly interesting when considering the appearance of the dot product between the Lyapunov function and ρ. This dot product
makes it apparent that the approximation improves when ρ
is large only where Φw L is small. This provides evidence
that the stationary distribution of the MDP under the opti-

Of course, a similar scenario occurs in infinite state spaces
as well. Multiple states near to each other may be sampled,
while other regions have very few samples; this encourages the linear program to choose features and an approximate value function which tightens constraints in heavilysampled regions at the expense of sparsely-sampled regions. In this section we discuss the effects of sampling
from an arbitrary distribution over the state space µ and
ways this can help the researcher understand how to design
sampling methods.
Observation 1 Let Σ1 and Σµ be sample sets of equal cardinality N drawn from the state space from the uniform distribution and an arbitrary distribution µ, respectively. Let
Φ1 and Φµ be the feature matrices defined over the states
of sets Σ1 and Σµ . For any weight vector w,
E [µΦ1 w] = E [1Φµ w] .
This observation is easy to support; both expectations equal
∫S µ(s)Φ(s)w ds.
This means that for any w, sampling from a non-uniform
distribution µ provides an equivalent objective function in
expectation to sampling from a uniform distribution but setting the state-relevance weights equal to µ. We note this
is not equivalent to expecting the same approximate value
function as the constraints remain different; this makes the
effect of altering the sampling distribution greater than that
of altering the objective function alone.
Additionally, the bound presented in Theorem 1 offers an
interpretation of results from sampling from a distribution.
As sampling becomes less uniform, e p likely increases, due
to the existence of larger unsampled regions. For example,
this would happen in the Lipschitz-continuous case for fulfilling Assumption 1. However, for a sampling distribution

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

6.1. Domain
20

15

10

5
30
25

20

20
15
10

10
5
0

0

(b) V ∗

(a) Reward Regions

Figure 1. Room Domain

which is dense where the Lyapunov value is small, then
the total Lyapunov value in the numerator of the first addend is small, as well. Therefore, it may be that the ideal
sampling distribution is one which is dense where the Lyapunov value is low, but still provides sufficient coverage for
e p to be small.

6. Experimental Results
In this section, we demonstrate experimentally the conclusions drawn in the previous sections. Previous literature
has already demonstrated RALP’s effectiveness in common benchmark domains; the purpose of this section therefore, is to clearly illustrate the conclusions of the previous sections. In a simple, easily visualized domain, we
make a series of comparisons. First, we compare the approximation accuracy of sampling from a domain with a
stable Lyapunov function to the accuracy resulting from
sampling from a domain without such a function. Next,
we compare the accuracy of the approximation resulting
from sampling uniformly to the accuracy of the approximation resulting from sampling from two different nonuniform distributions. Finally, we compare the approximation
accuracy of calculating an approximation with ρ = 1 to
the approximation accuracy of calculating an approximation when ρ is nonuniform. This is demonstrated using two
different, nonuniform distributions.
The results were obtained by drawing samples and calculating an approximation 500 times for each compared approach; the error ∣V ∗ − Φw∣ was then calculated, and averaged across all 500 trials. Finally, we calculate and display
the difference between the average errors from the two approaches. So, if V̂iA is the approximation from the i-th run
on approach A, then when comparing two approaches, A
and B, a point on the graphs of Figure 2 equals

500 ∣V ∗ (s) − V̂ A (s)∣
i

∑

i=1

500

500 ∣V ∗ (s) − V̂ B (s)∣
i

−∑

i=1

500

.

All of the experiments were run on a domain defined by a
25 by 25 grid world. This world included four reward regions in the corners of the grid, each of which consisted of
9 states, as can be seen in Figure 1(a). Two reward regions
(colored gold) had a reward of 1, while the others had a reward of -1 (colored red). The remaining states had a reward
of 0. Actions were to move one square in any of the four
directions, unless constrained by a wall, in which case that
action would result in no movement. The discount factor γ
was set to 0.95. For all trials, the feature set consisted of
symmetric Gaussian features centered around each σs with
variances of 2, 5, 10, 15, 25, 50, and 75, plus the bias feature, resulting in 9n + 1 features for n samples. The optimal
value function can be seen in Figure 1(b).
This value function is an easy one for RALP to approximate with proper settings of the regularization parameter and sufficient sampling. The number of samples and
choices of the regularization parameter ψ were therefore
chosen to illustrate the differences between the results of
the compared methods, not to optimize performance.
6.2. Lyapunov Stable Domain
First, we demonstrate the improvement in RALP’s approximation when the domain has a stable Lyapunov function.
A stable Lyapunov function can be created by forcing the
actor into a defined area in the state space. In order to keep
the representational difficulty of the optimal value functions the same, we created a Lyapunov function by eliminating actions which move the actor further from the nearest positive reward. This preserves the optimal policy of
the unaltered domain, keeping the optimal value functions
identical, making approximation accuracy a fair comparison.
In the domain without a stable Lyapunov function, the actor was free to move in the state space based on a random
choice among the four actions. However, in the domain
with a stable Lyapunov function, the actor was only allowed to move in the two directions which would not move
it further from the nearest goal. We note that not all remaining actions are optimal, so sampling still includes offpolicy samples.
This creates a Lyapunov function where L(s) equals the
Manhattan distance from s to the nearest of state (1,1) or
(25,25), and B = {(1, 1), (25, 25)}. In each trial, we uniformly sampled 20 samples. The regularization parameter
ψ was set to 0.2 and ρ was 1.
The result of subtracting the average errors of the approximation from the domain with a Lyapunov function from the
domain without a Lyapunov function can be seen in Figure
2(a). Therefore, positive values indicate higher error from

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

2

2.5

1.5

0.6

2
0.4

1
1.5
0.5

0.2
1

0
0
0.5

−0.5

0
25

−1
30

−0.2
30
20

25

20

25
15

20
15
10
0

15
10

10

5

10

5
0

0

(a) Average error from sampling from stable domain - Average error from sampling
from unstable domain

20

15

10

10
5

25

20

20

5
0

0

(b) Average error from sampling from 1 Average error from sampling from ζ

0

0

(c) Average error from ρ = 1 - Average
error from ρ = ζ

1

0
−0.5
−1
−1
−2

−3
30

−1.5
30
25

20

20

25

20

20

15
10

10

15
10

10

5
0

5
0

0

(d) Average error from sampling from 1 Average error from sampling from (1 − ζ)

0

(e) Average error from ρ = 1 - Average
error from ρ = (1 − ζ)

Figure 2. Difference in Average Error

the domain without a Lyapunov function.
The results show that an approximation learned from samples drawn from a stable domain is more accurate than an
approximation learned from a less stable domain everywhere except for where s is near equal distance from the
two goal states. This reinforces the intuition from Subsection 4.1 that samples drawn from a stable domain are more
effective than those that are not, particularly near the most
heavily-visited regions.
6.3. Sampling from a Nonuniform Distribution
Next we illustrate the change in approximation accuracy
when sampling from a nonuniform distribution µ. Section
5 presents evidence that a distribution which is most dense
where L(s) is smallest may be advantageous. To create
such a distribution, an agent was started at a random state,
and was allowed to take the optimal policy for 25 steps.
This was done 10,000 times, and the number of visits to
each state was tabulated and normalized. This defined our
distribution, which was heaviest on the edges and reward
corners, and otherwise slightly increasing with increasing
proximity to the positive reward regions. We will refer to
this distribution as ζ.
For these trials, 20 samples were drawn per run from the
domain with the stable Lyapunov function as discussed in

Subsection 6.2. The regularization parameter ψ was set to
1.5, and ρ = 1. The average error from the 500 uniformly
sampled runs was subtracted from the average error from
the 500 runs with µ = ζ; the result can be seen in Figure
2(b). Because the error from the nonuniform sampling was
subtracted from the error from uniform sampling, the positive difference indicates the results from sampling from ζ
were superior. The results show the distribution met the
goal from Section 5; sampling was varied enough to keep
e p low, while dense enough in the areas where L(s) was
small.
We then subtracted ζ from 1 and normalized, making a
distribution we will refer to as 1 − ζ, which was largest
where an agent was least likely to traverse in the stable
domain. We subtracted the average error from sampling
from µ = 1 − ζ from the average error from sampling uniformly, to produce Figure 2(d). A positive value would
indicate larger error from the approximations on uniformly
sampled states. However, through the entirety of the state
space, and particularly in the most trafficked areas, sampling from 1 − ζ gave us an inferior result.
This provides evidence for the conclusions of Section 5 that
a sampling distribution which is densest in the areas where
the Lyapunov function is smallest would produce the best
approximations.

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

6.4. Changing the State-Relevance Weights

accuracy across the state space is rarely consistent.

Lastly, we illustrate the effect on the approximation of
changing the state-relevance weights. 200 samples were
drawn uniformly from the state space; whereas the effects
from the previous two experiments are most pronounced
when samples are sparse, the effects from altering ρ are
most pronounced when a number of constraints can be
tightened in a given region.

In this paper, we demonstrate the importance of understanding these ideas, and produce a bound on the approximation error of RALP which is tighter and more informative than previous bounds. This bound provides intuition
into the quality of the RALP approximation as a function
of state-relevance weights and sampling distributions. In
addition, we demonstrated that the quality of a RALP approximation is particularly good when the domain is stable
and has a Lyapunov function with a small β L .

We would prefer to set ρ to the stationary distribution; however, because the domain is not recurrent, this is not an
option. However, the distribution ζ created for sampling
in Subsection 6.3 is large where the Lyapunov function is
small, making it a reasonable replacement. In one set of
trials, ρ(s) was set to the value of this distribution at that
state; in the other, ρ = 1. ψ was set to 4. Average error from
the approximation resulting from a nonuniform ρ was subtracted from average error from the approximation resulting from a uniform ρ. Therefore, a positive value indicates
a better approximation from the nonuniform ρ. Sampling
was done uniformly from the stable domain.
Figure 2(c) shows that nearly the entire state space was
more accurate with a nonuniform ρ, except for where
ζ(s) ≈ 0. The difference is small because with a large number of samples, both approximations were quite accurate.
In addition, we compared the uniform ρ approximation to
an approximation using ρ = 1 − ζ, which is large where
the Lyapunov value is large, resulting in an increased dot
product ρΦw in Theorem 1. Again, we subtracted the error of the approximation resulting from ρ = ζ − 1 from the
error of the approximation resulting from ρ = 1, producing Figure 2(e). A positive value indicates the nonuniform
ρ approximated that state better than did using a uniform
ρ. However, there are few positive values as the use of
ρ = 1 − ζ resulted in a dramatically inferior approximation,
particularly in areas where ρ was small.
From both figures, it is clear that a higher ρ value in a given
portion of the state space resulted in an improved approximation, particularly if designed with Theorem 1 in mind.

7. Conclusion
The experimental success of RALP in previous literature, along with its easily-fulfilled assumptions, suggests
promise for its application to real-life, complicated, and
complex domains. Despite this promise, and despite the
evidence that the effects are dramatic, no theory had been
produced to analyze changes in the approximation quality
given changes to the objective function parameter ρ, or due
to differences in sampling strategies. These considerations
are essential to the use of RALP in the real world; it is
rarely possible to sample uniformly, and the importance of

Future work remains, particularly in the area of solving the
linear program quickly in the presence of large amount of
data. Though convex optimization solvers are considered
“fast,” with large amounts of data, the memory and time requirements may be too large for realistic use. Fortunately, it
may be that the structure of the problem, the small percentage of tight constraints, and small percentage of active features will avail itself to faster, but equivalent, approaches.

Acknowledgements
Thank you to the anonymous reviewers for their help
in improving this paper. Additionally, we are grateful for support from the Naval Research Laboratory Information Management & Decision Architecture Branch
(Code 5580), as well as financial support by the Office
of Naval Research, grant numbers N001613WX20992 and
N0001414WX20507.

References
Bertsimas, Dimitris, Gamarnik, David, and Tsitsiklis,
John N. Geometric bounds for stationary distributions of
infinite markov chains via lyapunov functions. Technical
report, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1998.
de Farias, Daniela Pucci and Van Roy, Benjamin. The Linear Programming Approach to Approximate Dynamic
Programming. Operations Research, 2003.
de Farias, Daniela Pucci and Van Roy, Benjamin. On Constraint Sampling for the Linear Programming Approach
to Approximate Dynamic Programming. Mathematics of
Operations Research, pp. 462–478, 2004.
d’Epenoux, F. A probabilistic production and inventory
problem. Management Science, 1963.
Johns, Jeffrey, Painter-Wakefield, Christopher, and Parr,
Ronald. Linear complementarity for regularized policy
evaluation and improvement. In Lafferty, J., Williams,
C. K. I., Shawe-Taylor, J., Zemel, R.S., and Culotta, A.
(eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 23, pp. 1009–1017, 2010.

An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on RALP Approximation Accuracy

Kolter, J. Zico and Ng, Andrew. Regularization and Feature
Selection in Least-Squares Temporal Difference Learning. In Bottou, Léon and Littman, Michael (eds.), Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 521–528, Montreal, Canada, June
2009. Omnipress.
Liu, Bo, Mahadevan, Sridhar, and Liu, Ji. Regularized
Off-Policy TD-Learning. In Proceedings of the Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS),
2012.
Mahadevan, Sridhar and Liu, Bo. Sparse Q-Learning With
Mirror Descent. In Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2012.
Perkins, Theodore J. and Barto, Andrew G. Lyapunov Design for Safe Reinforcement Learning. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 3:803–832, 2003.
Petrik, Marek, Taylor, Gavin, Parr, Ronald, and Zilberstein, Shlomo. Feature selection using regularization in
approximate linear programs for markov decision processes. In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Machine Learning, 2010.
Rohanimanesh, Khashayar, Platt, Robert, Mahadevan,
Sridhar, and Grupen, Roderic. Coarticulation in Markov
Decision Processes. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2004.
Schweitzer, Paul J. and Seidmann, Abraham. Generalized
Polynomial Approximations in Markovian Decision Processes. Journal of mathematical analysis and applications, 110(6):568–582, 1985.
Taylor, Gavin and Parr, Ronald. Value function approximation in noisy environments using locally smoothed
regularized approximate linear programs. In de Freitas,
Nando and Murphy, Kevin (eds.), Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 835–842, Catalina island, California, June 2012.
Taylor, Gavin, Geer, Connor, and Piekut, David. An Analysis of State-Relevance Weights and Sampling Distributions on L1 -Regularized Approximate Linear Programming Approximation Accuracy. Technical report, arXiv,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.4258, April 2014.

