Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms
David Silver
DeepMind Technologies, London, UK
Guy Lever
University College London, UK
Nicolas Heess, Thomas Degris, Daan Wierstra, Martin Riedmiller
DeepMind Technologies, London, UK

Abstract
In this paper we consider deterministic policy
gradient algorithms for reinforcement learning
with continuous actions. The deterministic policy gradient has a particularly appealing form: it
is the expected gradient of the action-value function. This simple form means that the deterministic policy gradient can be estimated much
more efficiently than the usual stochastic policy gradient. To ensure adequate exploration,
we introduce an off-policy actor-critic algorithm
that learns a deterministic target policy from an
exploratory behaviour policy. We demonstrate
that deterministic policy gradient algorithms can
significantly outperform their stochastic counterparts in high-dimensional action spaces.

1. Introduction
Policy gradient algorithms are widely used in reinforcement learning problems with continuous action spaces. The
basic idea is to represent the policy by a parametric probability distribution πθ (a|s) = P [a|s; θ] that stochastically
selects action a in state s according to parameter vector θ.
Policy gradient algorithms typically proceed by sampling
this stochastic policy and adjusting the policy parameters
in the direction of greater cumulative reward.
In this paper we instead consider deterministic policies
a = µθ (s). It is natural to wonder whether the same approach can be followed as for stochastic policies: adjusting
the policy parameters in the direction of the policy gradient. It was previously believed that the deterministic policy gradient did not exist, or could only be obtained when
using a model (Peters, 2010). However, we show that the
deterministic policy gradient does indeed exist, and furthermore it has a simple model-free form that simply follows
the gradient of the action-value function. In addition, we
show that the deterministic policy gradient is the limiting
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP volume 32. Copyright 2014 by the author(s).

DAVID @ DEEPMIND . COM
GUY. LEVER @ UCL . AC . UK

*@ DEEPMIND . COM

case, as policy variance tends to zero, of the stochastic policy gradient.
From a practical viewpoint, there is a crucial difference between the stochastic and deterministic policy gradients. In
the stochastic case, the policy gradient integrates over both
state and action spaces, whereas in the deterministic case it
only integrates over the state space. As a result, computing
the stochastic policy gradient may require more samples,
especially if the action space has many dimensions.
In order to explore the full state and action space, a stochastic policy is often necessary. To ensure that our deterministic policy gradient algorithms continue to explore satisfactorily, we introduce an off-policy learning algorithm. The
basic idea is to choose actions according to a stochastic
behaviour policy (to ensure adequate exploration), but to
learn about a deterministic target policy (exploiting the efficiency of the deterministic policy gradient). We use the
deterministic policy gradient to derive an off-policy actorcritic algorithm that estimates the action-value function using a differentiable function approximator, and then updates the policy parameters in the direction of the approximate action-value gradient. We also introduce a notion of
compatible function approximation for deterministic policy
gradients, to ensure that the approximation does not bias
the policy gradient.
We apply our deterministic actor-critic algorithms to several benchmark problems: a high-dimensional bandit; several standard benchmark reinforcement learning tasks with
low dimensional action spaces; and a high-dimensional
task for controlling an octopus arm. Our results demonstrate a significant performance advantage to using deterministic policy gradients over stochastic policy gradients,
particularly in high dimensional tasks. Furthermore, our
algorithms require no more computation than prior methods: the computational cost of each update is linear in the
action dimensionality and the number of policy parameters.
Finally, there are many applications (for example in
robotics) where a differentiable control policy is provided,
but where there is no functionality to inject noise into the
controller. In these cases, the stochastic policy gradient is
inapplicable, whereas our methods may still be useful.

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms

2. Background
2.1. Preliminaries
We study reinforcement learning and control problems in
which an agent acts in a stochastic environment by sequentially choosing actions over a sequence of time steps, in
order to maximise a cumulative reward. We model the
problem as a Markov decision process (MDP) which comprises: a state space S, an action space A, an initial state
distribution with density p1 (s1 ), a stationary transition dynamics distribution with conditional density p(st+1 |st , at )
satisfying the Markov property p(st+1 |s1 , a1 , ..., st , at ) =
p(st+1 |st , at ), for any trajectory s1 , a1 , s2 , a2 , ..., sT , aT
in state-action space, and a reward function r : S ×A → R.
A policy is used to select actions in the MDP. In general
the policy is stochastic and denoted by πθ : S → P(A),
where P(A) is the set of probability measures on A and
θ ∈ Rn is a vector of n parameters, and πθ (at |st ) is
the conditional probability density at at associated with
the policy. The agent uses its policy to interact with the
MDP to give a trajectory of states, actions and rewards,
h1:T = s1 , a1 , r1 ..., sT , aT , rT over S × A × R. The
total discounted reward from time-step t
return rtγ is the P
∞
k−t
onwards, rtγ =
r(sk , ak ) where 0 < γ < 1.
k=t γ
Value functions are defined to be the expected total discounted reward, V π (s) = E [r1γ |S1 = s; π] and Qπ (s, a) =
E [r1γ |S1 = s, A1 = a; π].1 The agent’s goal is to obtain a
policy which maximises the cumulative discounted reward
from the start state, denoted by the performance objective
J(π) = E [r1γ |π].
We denote the density at state s0 after transitioning for t
time steps from state s by p(s → s0 , t, π). We also denote
the
(improper) discounted state distribution by ρπ (s0 ) :=
R P
∞
t−1
p1 (s)p(s → s0 , t, π)ds. We can then write
t=1 γ
S
the performance objective as an expectation,
Z
Z
π
J(πθ ) =
ρ (s)
πθ (s, a)r(s, a)dads
S

A

= Es∼ρπ ,a∼πθ [r(s, a)]

(1)

where Es∼ρ [·] denotes the (improper) expected value with
respect to discounted state distribution ρ(s).2 In the remainder of the paper we suppose for simplicity that A =
Rm and that S is a compact subset of Rd .
2.2. Stochastic Policy Gradient Theorem
Policy gradient algorithms are perhaps the most popular
class of continuous action reinforcement learning algorithms. The basic idea behind these algorithms is to adjust
1

To simplify notation, we frequently drop the random variable in the conditional density and write p(st+1 |st , at ) =
p(st+1 |St = st , At = at ); furthermore we superscript value
functions by π rather than πθ .
2
The results in this paper may be extended to an average reward performance objective by choosing ρ(s) to be the stationary
distribution of an ergodic MDP.

the parameters θ of the policy in the direction of the performance gradient ∇θ J(πθ ). The fundamental result underlying these algorithms is the policy gradient theorem (Sutton
et al., 1999),
Z
Z
π
∇θ J(πθ ) =
ρ (s)
∇θ πθ (a|s)Qπ (s, a)dads
S

A

= Es∼ρπ ,a∼πθ [∇θ log πθ (a|s)Qπ (s, a)]

(2)

The policy gradient is surprisingly simple. In particular,
despite the fact that the state distribution ρπ (s) depends on
the policy parameters, the policy gradient does not depend
on the gradient of the state distribution.
This theorem has important practical value, because it reduces the computation of the performance gradient to a
simple expectation. The policy gradient theorem has been
used to derive a variety of policy gradient algorithms (Degris et al., 2012a), by forming a sample-based estimate of
this expectation. One issue that these algorithms must address is how to estimate the action-value function Qπ (s, a).
Perhaps the simplest approach is to use a sample return rtγ
to estimate the value of Qπ (st , at ), which leads to a variant
of the REINFORCE algorithm (Williams, 1992).
2.3. Stochastic Actor-Critic Algorithms
The actor-critic is a widely used architecture based on the
policy gradient theorem (Sutton et al., 1999; Peters et al.,
2005; Bhatnagar et al., 2007; Degris et al., 2012a). The
actor-critic consists of two eponymous components. An actor adjusts the parameters θ of the stochastic policy πθ (s)
by stochastic gradient ascent of Equation 2. Instead of the
unknown true action-value function Qπ (s, a) in Equation
2, an action-value function Qw (s, a) is used, with parameter vector w. A critic estimates the action-value function
Qw (s, a) ≈ Qπ (s, a) using an appropriate policy evaluation algorithm such as temporal-difference learning.
In general, substituting a function approximator Qw (s, a)
for the true action-value function Qπ (s, a) may introduce
bias. However, if the function approximator is compatible such that i) Qw (s, a) = ∇θ log πθ (a|s)> w and ii) the
parameters w are chosen toh minimise the mean-squared
i er2
2
w
π
ror  (w) = Es∼ρπ ,a∼πθ (Q (s, a) − Q (s, a)) , then
there is no bias (Sutton et al., 1999),
∇θ J(πθ ) = Es∼ρπ ,a∼πθ [∇θ log πθ (a|s)Qw (s, a)]

(3)

More intuitively, condition i) says that compatible function
approximators are linear in “features” of the stochastic policy, ∇θ log πθ (a|s), and condition ii) requires that the parameters are the solution to the linear regression problem
that estimates Qπ (s, a) from these features. In practice,
condition ii) is usually relaxed in favour of policy evaluation algorithms that estimate the value function more efficiently by temporal-difference learning (Bhatnagar et al.,
2007; Degris et al., 2012b; Peters et al., 2005); indeed if

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms

both i) and ii) are satisfied then the overall algorithm is
equivalent to not using a critic at all (Sutton et al., 2000),
much like the REINFORCE algorithm (Williams, 1992).
2.4. Off-Policy Actor-Critic
It is often useful to estimate the policy gradient off-policy
from trajectories sampled from a distinct behaviour policy
β(a|s) 6= πθ (a|s). In an off-policy setting, the performance objective is typically modified to be the value function of the target policy, averaged over the state distribution
of the behaviour policy (Degris et al., 2012b),
Z
Jβ (πθ ) =
ρβ (s)V π (s)ds
ZS Z
=
ρβ (s)πθ (a|s)Qπ (s, a)dads
S

A

Differentiating the performance objective and applying an
approximation gives the off-policy policy-gradient (Degris
et al., 2012b)
Z Z
∇θ Jβ (πθ ) ≈
ρβ (s)∇θ πθ (a|s)Qπ (s, a)dads
(4)
S A


πθ (a|s)
π
∇θ log πθ (a|s)Q (s, a)
= Es∼ρβ ,a∼β
βθ (a|s)
(5)
This approximation drops a term that depends on the
action-value gradient ∇θ Qπ (s, a); Degris et al. (2012b)
argue that this is a good approximation since it can preserve the set of local optima to which gradient ascent converges. The Off-Policy Actor-Critic (OffPAC) algorithm
(Degris et al., 2012b) uses a behaviour policy β(a|s) to
generate trajectories. A critic estimates a state-value function, V v (s) ≈ V π (s), off-policy from these trajectories, by
gradient temporal-difference learning (Sutton et al., 2009).
An actor updates the policy parameters θ, also off-policy
from these trajectories, by stochastic gradient ascent of
Equation 5. Instead of the unknown action-value function
Qπ (s, a) in Equation 5, the temporal-difference error δt is
used, δt = rt+1 + γV v (st+1 ) − V v (st ); this can be shown
to provide an approximation to the true gradient (Bhatnagar et al., 2007). Both the actor and the critic use an im(a|s)
portance sampling ratio πβθθ (a|s)
to adjust for the fact that
actions were selected according to π rather than β.

3. Gradients of Deterministic Policies
We now consider how the policy gradient framework may
be extended to deterministic policies. Our main result is
a deterministic policy gradient theorem, analogous to the
stochastic policy gradient theorem presented in the previous section. We provide several ways to derive and understand this result. First we provide an informal intuition
behind the form of the deterministic policy gradient. We

then give a formal proof of the deterministic policy gradient theorem from first principles. Finally, we show that the
deterministic policy gradient theorem is in fact a limiting
case of the stochastic policy gradient theorem. Details of
the proofs are deferred until the appendices.
3.1. Action-Value Gradients
The majority of model-free reinforcement learning algorithms are based on generalised policy iteration: interleaving policy evaluation with policy improvement (Sutton and Barto, 1998). Policy evaluation methods estimate
the action-value function Qπ (s, a) or Qµ (s, a), for example by Monte-Carlo evaluation or temporal-difference
learning. Policy improvement methods update the policy with respect to the (estimated) action-value function.
The most common approach is a greedy maximisation (or
soft maximisation) of the action-value function, µk+1 (s) =
k
argmax Q µ (s, a).
a

In continuous action spaces, greedy policy improvement
becomes problematic, requiring a global maximisation at
every step. Instead, a simple and computationally attractive alternative is to move the policy in the direction of the
gradient of Q, rather than globally maximising Q. Specifically, for each visited state s, the policy parameters θk+1
k
are updated in proportion to the gradient ∇θ Qµ (s, µθ (s)).
Each state suggests a different direction of policy improvement; these may be averaged together by taking an expectation with respect to the state distribution ρµ (s),
h
i
k
θk+1 = θk + αEs∼ρµk ∇θ Qµ (s, µθ (s))

(6)

By applying the chain rule we see that the policy improvement may be decomposed into the gradient of the actionvalue with respect to actions, and the gradient of the policy
with respect to the policy parameters.
θ

k+1

k

= θ + αEs∼ρµk



k

∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qµ (s, a)


a=µθ (s)

(7)
By convention ∇θ µθ (s) is a Jacobian matrix such that each
column is the gradient ∇θ [µθ (s)]d of the dth action dimension of the policy with respect to the policy parameters θ.
However, by changing the policy, different states are visited and the state distribution ρµ will change. As a result
it is not immediately obvious that this approach guarantees improvement, without taking account of the change to
distribution. However, the theory below shows that, like
the stochastic policy gradient theorem, there is no need to
compute the gradient of the state distribution; and that the
intuitive update outlined above is following precisely the
gradient of the performance objective.

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms

3.2. Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem
We now formally consider a deterministic policy µθ : S →
A with parameter vector θ ∈ Rn . We define a performance
objective J(µθ ) = E [r1γ |µ], and define probability distribution p(s → s0 , t, µ) and discounted state distribution
ρµ (s) analogously to the stochastic case. This again lets us
to write the performance objective as an expectation,
Z
J(µθ ) =
ρµ (s)r(s, µθ (s))ds
S

= Es∼ρµ [r(s, µθ (s))]

(8)

We now provide the deterministic analogue to the policy
gradient theorem. The proof follows a similar scheme to
(Sutton et al., 1999) and is provided in Appendix B.
Theorem 1 (Deterministic Policy Gradient Theorem).
Suppose that the MDP satisfies conditions A.1 (see Appendix; these imply that ∇θ µθ (s) and ∇a Qµ (s, a) exist
and that the deterministic policy gradient exists. Then,
Z
∇θ J(µθ ) =
ρµ (s)∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s) ds
S
h
i
= Es∼ρµ ∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s) (9)
3.3. Limit of the Stochastic Policy Gradient
The deterministic policy gradient theorem does not at first
glance look like the stochastic version (Equation 2). However, we now show that, for a wide class of stochastic
policies, including many bump functions, the deterministic policy gradient is indeed a special (limiting) case of the
stochastic policy gradient. We parametrise stochastic policies πµθ ,σ by a deterministic policy µθ : S → A and a
variance parameter σ, such that for σ = 0 the stochastic
policy is equivalent to the deterministic policy, πµθ ,0 ≡ µθ .
Then we show that as σ → 0 the stochastic policy gradient converges to the deterministic gradient (see Appendix
C for proof and technical conditions).
Theorem 2. Consider a stochastic policy πµθ ,σ such that
πµθ ,σ (a|s) = νσ (µθ (s), a), where σ is a parameter controlling the variance and νσ satisfy conditions B.1 and the
MDP satisfies conditions A.1 and A.2. Then,
lim ∇θ J(πµθ ,σ ) = ∇θ J(µθ )
σ↓0

(10)

where on the l.h.s. the gradient is the standard stochastic
policy gradient and on the r.h.s. the gradient is the deterministic policy gradient.
This is an important result because it shows that the familiar machinery of policy gradients, for example compatible
function approximation (Sutton et al., 1999), natural gradients (Kakade, 2001), actor-critic (Bhatnagar et al., 2007),
or episodic/batch methods (Peters et al., 2005), is also applicable to deterministic policy gradients.

4. Deterministic Actor-Critic Algorithms
We now use the deterministic policy gradient theorem
to derive both on-policy and off-policy actor-critic algorithms. We begin with the simplest case – on-policy updates, using a simple Sarsa critic – so as to illustrate the
ideas as clearly as possible. We then consider the off-policy
case, this time using a simple Q-learning critic to illustrate
the key ideas. These simple algorithms may have convergence issues in practice, due both to bias introduced by the
function approximator, and also the instabilities caused by
off-policy learning. We then turn to a more principled approach using compatible function approximation and gradient temporal-difference learning.
4.1. On-Policy Deterministic Actor-Critic
In general, behaving according to a deterministic policy
will not ensure adequate exploration and may lead to suboptimal solutions. Nevertheless, our first algorithm is an
on-policy actor-critic algorithm that learns and follows a
deterministic policy. Its primary purpose is didactic; however, it may be useful for environments in which there is
sufficient noise in the environment to ensure adequate exploration, even with a deterministic behaviour policy.
Like the stochastic actor-critic, the deterministic actorcritic consists of two components. The critic estimates
the action-value function while the actor ascends the gradient of the action-value function. Specifically, an actor adjusts the parameters θ of the deterministic policy µθ (s) by
stochastic gradient ascent of Equation 9. As in the stochastic actor-critic, we substitute a differentiable action-value
function Qw (s, a) in place of the true action-value function Qµ (s, a). A critic estimates the action-value function
Qw (s, a) ≈ Qµ (s, a), using an appropriate policy evaluation algorithm. For example, in the following deterministic
actor-critic algorithm, the critic uses Sarsa updates to estimate the action-value function (Sutton and Barto, 1998),
δt = rt + γQw (st+1 , at+1 ) − Qw (st , at )

(11)

wt+1 = wt + αw δt ∇w Qw (st , at )

(12)

w

(13)

θt+1 = θt + αθ ∇θ µθ (st ) ∇a Q (st , at )|a=µθ (s)

4.2. Off-Policy Deterministic Actor-Critic
We now consider off-policy methods that learn a deterministic target policy µθ (s) from trajectories generated by an
arbitrary stochastic behaviour policy π(s, a). As before, we
modify the performance objective to be the value function
of the target policy, averaged over the state distribution of
the behaviour policy,
Z
Jβ (µθ ) =
ρβ (s)V µ (s)ds
ZS
=
ρβ (s)Qµ (s, µθ (s))ds
S

(14)

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms

Z

ρβ (s)∇θ µθ (a|s)Qµ (s, a)ds
S
h
i
= Es∼ρβ ∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s)

∇θ Jβ (µθ ) ≈

(15)
This equation gives the off-policy deterministic policy gradient. Analogous to the stochastic case (see Equation 4),
we have dropped a term that depends on ∇θ Qµθ (s, a); justification similar to Degris et al. (2012b) can be made in
support of this approximation.
We now develop an actor-critic algorithm that updates the
policy in the direction of the off-policy deterministic policy
gradient. We again substitute a differentiable action-value
function Qw (s, a) in place of the true action-value function
Qµ (s, a) in Equation 15. A critic estimates the action-value
function Qw (s, a) ≈ Qµ (s, a), off-policy from trajectories
generated by β(a|s), using an appropriate policy evaluation
algorithm. In the following off-policy deterministic actorcritic (OPDAC) algorithm, the critic uses Q-learning updates to estimate the action-value function.
δt = rt + γQw (st+1 , µθ (st+1 )) − Qw (st , at )

(16)

w

wt+1 = wt + αw δt ∇w Q (st , at )

(17)

θt+1 = θt + αθ ∇θ µθ (st ) ∇a Qw (st , at )|a=µθ (s)

(18)

We note that stochastic off-policy actor-critic algorithms
typically use importance sampling for both actor and critic
(Degris et al., 2012b). However, because the deterministic
policy gradient removes the integral over actions, we can
avoid importance sampling in the actor; and by using Qlearning, we can avoid importance sampling in the critic.
4.3. Compatible Function Approximation
In general, substituting an approximate Qw (s, a) into the
deterministic policy gradient will not necessarily follow the
true gradient (nor indeed will it necessarily be an ascent direction at all). Similar to the stochastic case, we now find a
class of compatible function approximators Qw (s, a) such
that the true gradient is preserved. In other words, we find
a critic Qw (s, a) such that the gradient ∇a Qµ (s, a) can be
replaced by ∇a Qw (s, a), without affecting the deterministic policy gradient. The following theorem applies to both
on-policy, E[·] = Es∼ρµ [·], and off-policy, E[·] = Es∼ρβ [·],
Theorem 3. A function approximator Qw (s, a) is compatible
with a deterministic policy
h
i µθ (s), ∇θ Jβ (θ) =
E ∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qw (s, a)|a=µθ (s) , if

1. ∇a Qw (s, a)|a=µθ (s) = ∇θ µθ (s)> w

and

2. w minimises the mean-squared
error, M SE(θ, w) =

E (s; θ, w)> (s; θ, w)
where (s; θ, w)
=
∇a Qw (s, a)|a=µθ (s) − ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s)

Proof. If w minimises the MSE then the gradient of 2
w.r.t. w must be zero. We then use the fact that, by condition 1, ∇w (s; θ, w) = ∇θ µθ (s),
∇w M SE(θ, w) = 0
E [∇θ µθ (s)(s; θ, w)] = 0
h
i
E ∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qw (s, a)|a=µθ (s) =
h
i
E ∇θ µθ (s) ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s)
= ∇θ Jβ (µθ ) or ∇θ J(µθ )
For any deterministic policy µθ (s), there always exists a
compatible function approximator of the form Qw (s, a) =
(a − µθ (s))> ∇θ µθ (s)> w + V v (s), where V v (s) may be
any differentiable baseline function that is independent of
the action a; for example a linear combination of state features φ(s) and parameters v, V v (s) = v > φ(s) for parameters v. A natural interpretation is that V v (s) estimates
the value of state s, while the first term estimates the advantage Aw (s, a) of taking action a over action µθ (s) in
state s. The advantage function can be viewed as a linear
function approximator, Aw (s, a) = φ(s, a)> w with statedef

action features φ(s, a) = ∇θ µθ (s)(a − µθ (s)) and parameters w. Note that if there are m action dimensions and
n policy parameters, then ∇θ µθ (s) is an n × m Jacobian
matrix, so the feature vector is n × 1, and the parameter
vector w is also n × 1. A function approximator of this
form satisfies condition 1 of Theorem 3.
We note that a linear function approximator is not very useful for predicting action-values globally, since the actionvalue diverges to ±∞ for large actions. However, it can
still be highly effective as a local critic. In particular, it
represents the local advantage of deviating from the current policy, Aw (s, µθ (s) + δ) = δ > ∇θ µθ (s)> w, where δ
represents a small deviation from the deterministic policy.
As a result, a linear function approximator is sufficient to
select the direction in which the actor should adjust its policy parameters.
To satisfy condition 2 we need to find the parameters w
that minimise the mean-squared error between the gradient of Qw and the true gradient. This can be viewed as a
linear regression problem with “features” φ(s, a) and “targets” ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s) . In other words, features of the
policy are used to predict the true gradient ∇a Qµ (s, a) at
state s. However, acquiring unbiased samples of the true
gradient is difficult. In practice, we use a linear function approximator Qw (s, a) = φ(s, a)> w to satisfy condition 1, but we learn w by a standard policy evaluation
method (for example Sarsa or Q-learning, for the on-policy
or off-policy deterministic actor-critic algorithms respectively) that does not exactly satisfy condition 2. We note
that a reasonable solution to the policy evaluation problem will find Qw (s, a) ≈ Qµ (s, a) and will therefore ap-

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms

proximately (for smooth function approximators) satisfy
∇a Qw (s, a)|a=µθ (s) ≈ ∇a Qµ (s, a)|a=µθ (s) .
To summarise, a compatible off-policy deterministic actorcritic (COPDAC) algorithm consists of two components.
The critic is a linear function approximator that estimates
the action-value from features φ(s, a) = a> ∇θ µθ (s). This
may be learnt off-policy from samples of a behaviour policy β(a|s), for example using Q-learning or gradient Qlearning. The actor then updates its parameters in the direction of the critic’s action-value gradient. The following
COPDAC-Q algorithm uses a simple Q-learning critic.
δt = rt + γQw (st+1 , µθ (st+1 )) − Qw (st , at )

θt+1 = θt + αθ ∇θ µθ (st ) ∇θ µθ (st )> wt

(20)

wt+1 = wt + αw δt φ(st , at )

(21)

vt+1 = vt + αv δt φ(st )

(22)

(19)

It is well-known that off-policy Q-learning may diverge
when using linear function approximation. A more recent
family of methods, based on gradient temporal-difference
learning, are true gradient descent algorithm and are therefore sure to converge (Sutton et al., 2009). The basic idea of
these methods is to minimise the mean-squared projected
Bellman error (MSPBE) by stochastic gradient descent;
full details are beyond the scope of this paper. Similar to
the OffPAC algorithm (Degris et al., 2012b), we use gradient temporal-difference learning in the critic. Specifically,
we use gradient Q-learning in the critic (Maei et al., 2010),
and note that under suitable conditions on the step-sizes,
αθ , αw , αu , to ensure that the critic is updated on a faster
time-scale than the actor, the critic will converge to the parameters minimising the MSPBE (Sutton et al., 2009; Degris et al., 2012b). The following COPDAC-GQ algorithm
combines COPDAC with a gradient Q-learning critic,
δt = rt + γQw (st+1 , µθ (st+1 )) − Qw (st , at )

θt+1 = θt + αθ ∇θ µθ (st ) ∇θ µθ (st )> wt

(23)
(24)

wt+1 = wt + αw δt φ(st , at )
− αw γφ(st+1 , µθ (st+1 )) φ(st , at )> ut



(25)

vt+1 = vt + αv δt φ(st )
− αv γφ(st+1 ) φ(st , at )> ut



(26)

ut+1 = ut + αu δt − φ(st , at )> ut φ(st , at )




Es∼ρπ ,a∼πθ ∇θ log πθ (a|s)∇θ log πθ (a|s)> ; this metric
is invariant to reparameterisations of the policy (Bagnell
and Schneider, 2003). For deterministic
policies,we use

the metric Mµ (θ) = Es∼ρµ ∇θ µθ (s)∇θ µθ (s)> which
can be viewed as the limiting case of the Fisher information metric as policy variance is reduced to zero. By combining the deterministic policy gradient theorem with compatible function approximation
 we see that ∇θ J(µθ ) =
Es∼ρµ ∇θ µθ (s)∇θ µθ (s)> w and so the steepest ascent
direction is simply Mµ (θ)−1 ∇θ Jβ (µθ ) = w. This algorithm can be implemented by simplifying Equations 20 or
24 to θt+1 = θt + αθ wt .

(27)

Like stochastic actor-critic algorithms, the computational
complexity of all these updates is O(mn) per time-step.
Finally, we show that the natural policy gradient (Kakade,
2001; Peters et al., 2005) can be extended to deterministic policies. The steepest ascent direction of our
performance objective with respect to any metric M (θ)
is given by M (θ)−1 ∇θ J(µθ ) (Toussaint, 2012). The
natural gradient is the steepest ascent direction with
respect to the Fisher information metric Mπ (θ) =

5. Experiments
5.1. Continuous Bandit
Our first experiment focuses on a direct comparison between the stochastic policy gradient and the deterministic policy gradient. The problem is a continuous bandit problem with a high-dimensional quadratic cost function, −r(a) = (a − a∗ )> C(a − a∗ ). The matrix C is
positive definite with eigenvalues chosen from {0.1, 1},
and a∗ = [4, ..., 4]> . We consider action dimensions of
m = 10, 25, 50. Although this problem could be solved
analytically, given full knowledge of the quadratic, we are
interested here in the relative performance of model-free
stochastic and deterministic policy gradient algorithms.
For the stochastic actor-critic in the bandit task (SAC-B) we
use an isotropic Gaussian policy, πθ,y (·) ∼ N (θ, exp(y)),
and adapt both the mean and the variance of the policy. The
deterministic actor-critic algorithm is based on COPDAC,
using a target policy, µθ = θ and a fixed-width Gaussian
behaviour policy, β(·) ∼ N (θ, σβ2 ). The critic Q(a) is simply estimated by linear regression from the compatible features to the costs: for SAC-B the compatible features are
∇θ log πθ (a); for COPDAC-B they are ∇θ µθ (a)(a − θ); a
bias feature is also included in both cases. For this experiment the critic is recomputed from each successive batch
of 2m steps; the actor is updated once per batch. To evaluate performance we measure the average cost per step incurred by the mean (i.e. exploration is not penalised for
the on-policy algorithm). We performed a parameter sweep
over all step-size parameters and variance parameters (initial y for SAC; σβ2 for COPDAC). Figure 1 shows the performance of the best performing parameters for each algorithm, averaged over 5 runs. The results illustrate a significant performance advantage to the deterministic update,
which grows larger with increasing dimensionality.
We also ran an experiment in which the stochastic actorcritic used the same fixed variance σβ2 as the deterministic
actor-critic, so that only the mean was adapted. This did
not improve the performance of the stochastic actor-critic:
COPDAC-B still outperforms SAC-B by a very wide margin that grows larger with increasing dimension.

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms
10 action dimensions

2
1

10

1

1

10

0

10

0

10

0

10

−1

10

−1

10

−1

10

−2

10

−2

10

−2

10

−3

10

−3

10

−3

10

−4

10

−4

10

2

3

4

10
Time−steps

10
2

10

SAC−B
COPDAC−B

−4

10

10

50 action dimensions

2

10

10

Cost

25 action dimensions

2

10

10

3

4

10
Time−steps

2

10

3

10

10
Time−steps

4

10

-1.0
-2.0
-3.0
-4.0
-5.0
-6.0
0.0

COPDAC-Q
SAC
OffPAC-TD
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
Time-steps (x10000)

(a) Mountain Car

10.0

6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
COPDAC-Q
SAC
OffPAC-TD

-2.0
-4.0
-6.0
0.0

10.0 20.0 30.0 40.0
Time-steps (x10000)

(b) Pendulum

50.0

Total Reward Per Episode
(x1000)

0.0

Total Reward Per Episode
(x1000)

Total Reward Per Episode
(x1000)

Figure 1. Comparison of stochastic actor-critic (SAC-B) and deterministic actor-critic (COPDAC-B) on the continuous bandit task.
0.0
-5.0
-10.0
-15.0

COPDAC-Q
SAC
OffPAC-TD

-20.0
-25.0
0.0

10.0 20.0 30.0 40.0 50.0
Time-steps (x10000)

(c) 2D Puddle World

Figure 2. Comparison of stochastic on-policy actor-critic (SAC), stochastic off-policy actor-critic (OffPAC), and deterministic off-policy
actor-critic (COPDAC) on continuous-action reinforcement learning. Each point is the average test performance of the mean policy.

5.2. Continuous Reinforcement Learning
In our second experiment we consider continuous-action
variants of standard reinforcement learning benchmarks:
mountain car, pendulum and 2D puddle world. Our goal
is to see whether stochastic or deterministic actor-critic is
more efficient under Gaussian exploration. The stochastic actor-critic (SAC) algorithm was the actor-critic algorithm in Degris et al. (2012a); this algorithm performed
best out of several incremental actor-critic methods in a
comparison on mountain car. It uses a Gaussian policy
based on a linear combination of features, πθ,y (s, ·) ∼
N (θ> φ(s), exp(y > φ(s))), which adapts both the mean
and the variance of the policy; the critic uses a linear value
function approximator V (s) = v > φ(s) with the same features, updated by temporal-difference learning. The deterministic algorithm is based on COPDAC-Q, using a linear target policy, µθ (s) = θ> φ(s) and a fixed-width Gaussian behaviour policy, β(·|s) ∼ N (θ> φ(s), σβ2 ). The critic
again uses a linear value function V (s) = v > φ(s), as a
baseline for the compatible action-value function. In both
cases the features φ(s) are generated by tile-coding the
state-space. We also compare to an off-policy stochastic
actor-critic algorithm (OffPAC), using the same behaviour
policy β as just described, but learning a stochastic policy πθ,y (s, ·) as in SAC. This algorithm also used the same
critic V (s) = v > φ(s) algorithm and the update algorithm
described in Degris et al. (2012b) with λ = 0 and αu = 0.

For all algorithms, episodes were truncated after a maximum of 5000 steps. The discount was γ = 0.99 for mountain car and pendulum and γ = 0.999 for puddle world.
Actions outside the legal range were capped. We performed
a parameter sweep over step-size parameters; variance was
initialised to 1/2 the legal range. Figure 2 shows the performance of the best performing parameters for each algorithm, averaged over 30 runs. COPDAC-Q slightly outperformed both SAC and OffPAC in all three domains.
5.3. Octopus Arm
Finally, we tested our algorithms on an octopus arm (Engel
et al., 2005) task. The aim is to learn to control a simulated
octopus arm to hit a target. The arm consists of 6 segments
and is attached to a rotating base. There are 50 continuous state variables (x,y position/velocity of the nodes along
the upper/lower side of the arm; angular position/velocity
of the base) and 20 action variables that control three muscles (dorsal, transversal, central) in each segment as well as
the clockwise and counter-clockwise rotation of the base.
The goal is to strike the target with any part of the arm.
The reward function is proportional to the change in distance between the arm and the target. An episode ends
when the target is hit (with an additional reward of +50)
or after 300 steps. Previous work (Engel et al., 2005) simplified the high-dimensional action space using 6 “macroactions” corresponding to particular patterns of muscle activations; or applied stochastic policy gradients to a lower

Steps to target

Return per episode

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms
15
10
5
0

300
200
100
0
0

100000

200000

300000

Time steps

Figure 3. Ten runs of COPDAC on a 6-segment octopus arm with
20 action dimensions and 50 state dimensions; each point represents the return per episode (above) and the number of time-steps
for the arm to reach the target (below).

dimensional octopus arm with 4 segments (Heess et al.,
2012). Here, we apply deterministic policy gradients directly to a high-dimensional octopus arm with 6 segments.
We applied the COPDAC-Q algorithm, using a sigmoidal
multi-layer perceptron (8 hidden units and sigmoidal output units) to represent the policy µ(s). The advantage function Aw (s, a) was represented by compatible function approximation (see Section 4.3), while the state value function V v (s) was represented by a second multi-layer perceptron (40 hidden units and linear output units).3 The results
of 10 training runs are shown in Figure 3; the octopus arm
converged to a good solution in all cases. A video of an 8
segment arm, trained by COPDAC-Q, is also available.4

6. Discussion and Related Work
Using a stochastic policy gradient algorithm, the policy becomes more deterministic as the algorithm homes in on a
good strategy. Unfortunately this makes the stochastic policy gradient harder to estimate, because the policy gradient
∇θ πθ (a|s) changes more rapidly near the mean. Indeed,
the variance of the stochastic policy gradient for a Gaussian policy N (µ, σ 2 ) is proportional to 1/σ 2 (Zhao et al.,
2012), which grows to infinity as the policy becomes deterministic. This problem is compounded in high dimensions,
as illustrated by the continuous bandit task. The stochastic actor-critic estimates the stochastic
policy gradient in
R
Equation 2. The inner integral, A ∇θ πθ (a|s)Qπ (s, a)da,
is computed by sampling a high dimensional action space.
In contrast, the deterministic policy gradient can be computed immediately in closed form.
One may view our deterministic actor-critic as analogous,
in a policy gradient context, to Q-learning (Watkins and
Dayan, 1992). Q-learning learns a deterministic greedy
policy, off-policy, while executing a noisy version of the
3
Recall that the compatibility criteria apply to any differentiable baseline, including non-linear state-value functions.
4
http://www0.cs.ucl.ac.uk/staff/D.Silver/
web/Applications.html

greedy policy. Similarly, in our experiments COPDAC-Q
was used to learn a deterministic policy, off-policy, while
executing a noisy version of that policy. Note that we compared on-policy and off-policy algorithms in our experiments, which may at first sight appear odd. However, it
is analogous to asking whether Q-learning or Sarsa is more
efficient, by measuring the greedy policy learnt by each algorithm (Sutton and Barto, 1998).
Our actor-critic algorithms are based on model-free, incremental, stochastic gradient updates; these methods are
suitable when the model is unknown, data is plentiful and
computation is the bottleneck. It is straightforward in principle to extend these methods to batch/episodic updates, for
example by using LSTDQ (Lagoudakis and Parr, 2003) in
place of the incremental Q-learning critic. There has also
been a substantial literature on model-based policy gradient methods, largely focusing on deterministic and fullyknown transition dynamics (Werbos, 1990). These methods are strongly related to deterministic policy gradients
when the transition dynamics are also deterministic.
We are not the first to notice that the action-value gradient
provides a useful signal for reinforcement learning. The
NFQCA algorithm (Hafner and Riedmiller, 2011) uses two
neural networks to represent the actor and critic respectively. The actor adjusts the policy, represented by the first
neural network, in the direction of the action-value gradient, using an update similar to Equation 7. The critic updates the action-value function, represented by the second
neural network, using neural fitted-Q learning (a batch Qlearning update for approximate value iteration). However,
its critic network is incompatible with the actor network; it
is unclear how the local optima learnt by the critic (assuming it converges) will interact with actor updates.

7. Conclusion
We have presented a framework for deterministic policy
gradient algorithms. These gradients can be estimated
more efficiently than their stochastic counterparts, avoiding
a problematic integral over the action space. In practice,
the deterministic actor-critic significantly outperformed its
stochastic counterpart by several orders of magnitude in a
bandit with 50 continuous action dimensions, and solved a
challenging reinforcement learning problem with 20 continuous action dimensions and 50 state dimensions.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Community Seventh
Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement
270327 (CompLACS), the Gatsby Charitable Foundation, the
Royal Society, the ANR MACSi project, INRIA Bordeaux SudOuest, Mesocentre de Calcul Intensif Aquitain, and the French
National Grid Infrastructure via France Grille.

Deterministic Policy Gradient Algorithms

References
Bagnell, J. A. D. and Schneider, J. (2003). Covariant policy
search. In Proceeding of the International Joint Conference on Artifical Intelligence.
Bhatnagar, S., Sutton, R. S., Ghavamzadeh, M., and Lee,
M. (2007). Incremental natural actor-critic algorithms.
In Neural Information Processing Systems 21.
Degris, T., Pilarski, P. M., and Sutton, R. S. (2012a).
Model-free reinforcement learning with continuous action in practice. In American Control Conference.
Degris, T., White, M., and Sutton, R. S. (2012b). Linear
off-policy actor-critic. In 29th International Conference
on Machine Learning.
Engel, Y., Szabó, P., and Volkinshtein, D. (2005). Learning
to control an octopus arm with gaussian process temporal difference methods. In Neural Information Processing Systems 18.
Hafner, R. and Riedmiller, M. (2011). Reinforcement
learning in feedback control. Machine Learning, 84(12):137–169.
Heess, N., Silver, D., and Teh, Y. (2012). Actor-critic reinforcement learning with energy-based policies. JMLR
Workshop and Conference Proceedings: EWRL 2012,
24:43–58.
Kakade, S. (2001). A natural policy gradient. In Neural
Information Processing Systems 14, pages 1531–1538.
Lagoudakis, M. G. and Parr, R. (2003). Least-squares policy iteration. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
4:1107–1149.
Maei, H. R., Szepesvári, C., Bhatnagar, S., and Sutton,
R. S. (2010). Toward off-policy learning control with
function approximation. In 27th International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 719–726.
Peters, J. (2010). Policy gradient methods. Scholarpedia,
5(11):3698.
Peters, J., Vijayakumar, S., and Schaal, S. (2005). Natural
actor-critic. In 16th European Conference on Machine
Learning, pages 280–291.
Sutton, R. and Barto, A. (1998). Reinforcement Learning:
an Introduction. MIT Press.
Sutton, R. S., Maei, H. R., Precup, D., Bhatnagar, S., Silver, D., Szepesvári, C., and Wiewiora, E. (2009). Fast
gradient-descent methods for temporal-difference learning with linear function approximation. In 26th International Conference on Machine Learning, page 125.

Sutton, R. S., McAllester, D. A., Singh, S. P., and Mansour, Y. (1999). Policy gradient methods for reinforcement learning with function approximation. In Neural
Information Processing Systems 12, pages 1057–1063.
Sutton, R. S., Singh, S. P., and McAllester, D. A.
(2000).
Comparing policy-gradient algorithms.
http://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/
sutton/papers/SSMunpublished.pdf.
Toussaint, M. (2012). Some notes on gradient descent.
http://ipvs.informatik.uni-stuttgart.
de/mlr/marc/notes/gradientDescent.pdf.
Watkins, C. and Dayan, P. (1992). Q-learning. Machine
Learning, 8(3):279–292.
Werbos, P. J. (1990). A menu of designs for reinforcement
learning over time. In Neural networks for control, pages
67–95. Bradford.
Williams, R. J. (1992).
Simple statistical gradientfollowing algorithms for connectionist reinforcement
learning. Machine Learning, 8:229–256.
Zhao, T., Hachiya, H., Niu, G., and Sugiyama, M. (2012).
Analysis and improvement of policy gradient estimation.
Neural Networks, 26:118–129.

