Convex Total Least Squares

Dmitry Malioutov
IBM Research, 1101 Kitchawan Road, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 USA

DMALIOUTOV @ US . IBM . COM

Nikolai Slavov
NSLAVOV @ ALUM . MIT. EDU
Departments of Physics and Biology, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

Abstract
We study the total least squares (TLS) problem
that generalizes least squares regression by allowing measurement errors in both dependent
and independent variables. TLS is widely used
in applied fields including computer vision, system identification and econometrics. The special
case when all dependent and independent variables have the same level of uncorrelated Gaussian noise, known as ordinary TLS, can be solved
by singular value decomposition (SVD). However, SVD cannot solve many important practical TLS problems with realistic noise structure, such as having varying measurement noise,
known structure on the errors, or large outliers requiring robust error-norms. To solve such problems, we develop convex relaxation approaches
for a general class of structured TLS (STLS).
We show both theoretically and experimentally,
that while the plain nuclear norm relaxation incurs large approximation errors for STLS, the
re-weighted nuclear norm approach is very effective, and achieves better accuracy on challenging STLS problems than popular non-convex
solvers. We describe a fast solution based on
augmented Lagrangian formulation, and apply
our approach to an important class of biological
problems that use population average measurements to infer cell-type and physiological-state
specific expression levels that are very hard to
measure directly.

1. Introduction
Total least squares is a powerful generalization of ordinary least squares (LS) which allows errors in the meaProceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP volume 32. Copyright 2014 by the author(s).

sured explanatory variables (Golub & Van Loan, 1980).
It has become an indispensable tool in a variety of disciplines including chemometrics, system identification, astronomy, computer vision, and econometrics (Markovsky
& Van Huffel, 2007). Consider a least squares problem
y ≈ Xβ, where we would like to find coefficients β to
best predict the target vector y based on measured variables X. The usual assumption is that X is known exactly,
and that the errors come from i.i.d. additive Gaussian noise
n: y = Xβ +n. The LS problem has a simple closed-form
solution by minimizing ky − Xβk22 with respect to β. In
many applications not only y but also X is known only approximately, X = X0 + Ex , where X0 are the uncorrupted
values, and Ex are the unknown errors in observed variables. The total least squares (TLS) formulation, or errors
in variables regression, tries to jointly minimize errors in y
and in X (`2 -norm of n and Frobenius norm of Ex ):
min knk22 + kEx k2F where y = (X − Ex )β + n (1)

n,Ex ,β

While the optimization problem in this form is not convex,
it can in fact be reformulated as finding the closest rankdeficient matrix to a given matrix, and solved in closed
form via the singular value decomposition (SVD) (Golub
& Van Loan, 1980).
Many error-in-variables problems of practical interest have
additional information: for example, a subset of the entries
in X may be known exactly, we may know different entries with varying accuracy, and in general X may exhibit
a certain structure, e.g. block-diagonal, Toeplitz, or Hankel
in system identification literature (Markovsky et al., 2005).
Furthermore, it is often important to use an error-norm robust to outliers, e.g. Huber loss or `1 -loss. Unfortunately,
with rare exceptions1 , none of these problems allow an efficient solution, and the state of the art approach is to solve
them by local optimization methods (Markovsky & Usevich, 2014; Zhu et al., 2011; Srebro & Jaakkola, 2003).The
1

A closed form solution exists when subsets of columns are
fully known; a Fourier transform based approach can handle
block-circulant errors Ex (Beck & Ben-Tal, 2005).

Convex Total Least Squares

only available guarantee is typically the ability to reach a
stationary point of the non-convex objective.
In this paper we propose a principled formulation for STLS
based on convex relaxations of matrix rank. Our approach
uses the re-weighted nuclear norm relaxation (Fazel et al.,
2001) and is highly flexible: it can handle very general linear structure on errors, including arbitrary weights (changing noise for different entries), patterns of observed and unobserved errors, Toeplitz and Hankel structures, and even
norms other than the Frobenius norm. The nuclear norm
relaxation has been successfully used for a range of machine learning problems involving rank constraints, including low-rank matrix completion, low-order system approximation, and robust PCA (Cai et al., 2010; Chandrasekaran
et al., 2011). The STLS problem is conceptually different in that we do not seek low-rank solutions, but on the
contrary nearly full-rank solutions. We show both theoretically and experimentally that while the plain nuclear norm
formulation incurs large approximation errors, these can
be dramatically improved by using the re-weighted nuclear
norm. We suggest fast first-order methods based on Augmented Lagrangian multipliers (Bertsekas, 1982) to compute the STLS solution. As part of ALM we derive new
updates for the re-weighted nuclear-norm based on solving the Sylvester’s equation, which can also be used for
many other machine learning tasks relying on matrix-rank,
including matrix completion and robust PCA.
As a case study of our approach to STLS we consider an
important application in biology, quantification of cellular heterogeneity (Slavov & Botstein, 2011). We develop
a new representation for the problem as a large structured
linear system, and extend it to handle noise by a structured
TLS problem with block-diagonal error structure. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of STLS in recovering
physiological-state specific expression levels from aggregate measurements.
1.1. Total Least Squares
We first review the solution of ordinary TLS problems. We
simplify the notation from (1): combining our noisy data
X and y into one matrix, Ā , [X − y], and the errors into
E , [Ex − n] we have
 
β
min kEk2F where (Ā − E)
= 0.
(2)
1
The matrix Ā is in general full-rank, and a solution can
be obtained by finding a rank-deficient matrix closest to Ā
in terms of the Frobenius norm. This finds smallest errors
Ex and n such that y + n is in the range space of X −
Ex . The closest rank-deficient matrix is simply obtained by
computing the SVD, Ā = U SV T and setting the smallest
singular value to be zero.

Structured TLS problems (Markovsky & Van Huffel, 2007)
allow more realistic errors Ex : with subsets of measurements that may be known exactly; weights reflecting different measurement noise for each entry; requiring linear structure of errors Ex such as Toeplitz that is crucial
in deconvolution problems in signal processing. Unfortunately, the SVD does not apply to any of these more general
versions of TLS (Srebro & Jaakkola, 2003; Markovsky &
Van Huffel, 2007). Existing solutions to structured TLS
problems formulate a non-convex optimization problem
and attempt to solve it by local optimization (Markovsky
& Usevich, 2014) that suffers from local optima and lack
of guarantees on accuracy. We follow a different route and
use a convex relaxation for the STLS problem.

2. STLS via a nuclear norm relaxation
The STLS problem in a general form can be described as
follows (Markovsky & Van Huffel, 2007). Using the notation in Section 1.1, suppose our observed matrix Ā is
M × N with full column rank. We aim to find a nearby
rank-deficient matrix A, rank(A) ≤ N − 1, where the errors E have a certain linear structure:
min kW  Ek2F , where rank(A) ≤ N − 1
A = Ā − E , and L(E) = b

(3)

The key components here are the linear equalities that E
has to satisfy, L(E) = b. This notation represents a set
of linear constraints tr(LTi E) = bi , for i = 1, .., J. In our
application to cell heterogeneity quantification these constraints correspond to knowing certain entries of A exactly,
i.e. Eij = 0 for some subset of entries, while other entries vary freely. One may require other linear structure
such as Toeplitz or Hankel. We also allow an element-wise
weighting W  E, with Wi,j ≥ 0 on the errors, as some
observations may be measured with higher accuracy than
others. Finally, while we focus on the Frobenius norm of
the error, any other convex error metric, for example, mean
absolute error, or robust Huber loss, could be used instead.
The main difficulty in the formulation is posed by the nonconvex rank constraint. The STLS problem is a special case
of the structured low-rank approximation problem, where
rank is exactly N − 1 (Markovsky & Usevich, 2014). Next,
we propose a tractable formulation for STLS based on convex relaxations of matrix rank.
We start by formulating the nuclear-norm relaxation for
TLS and then improve upon it by using the re-weighted nuclear norm. The nuclear norm kAk∗ is a popular relaxation
used to convexify rank constraints (Cai et al., 2010), and it
is defined as the
P sum of the singular values of the matrix A,
i.e. kAk∗ = i σi (A). It can be viewed as the `1 -norm of
the singular value spectrum2 favoring few non-zero singu2

For diagonal matrices A the nuclear norm is exactly equiva-

Convex Total Least Squares

lar values, i.e., matrices with low-rank. Our initial nuclear
norm relaxation for the STLS problem is:
min kAk∗ + αkW  Ek2F such that

A = Ā − E , and L(E) = b

(4)

The parameter α balances error residuals vs. the nuclear
norm (proxy for rank). We chose the largest α, i.e. smallest
nuclear norm penalty, that still produces rank(A) ≤ N − 1.
This can be achieved by a simple binary search over α. In
contrast to matrix completion and robust PCA, the STLS
problem aims to find almost fully dense solutions with rank
N − 1, so it requires different analysis tools. We present
theoretical analysis specifically for the STLS problem in
Section 4. Next, we describe the re-weighted nuclear norm,
which, as we show in Section 4, is better suited for the
STLS problem than the plain nuclear norm.
2.1. Reweighted nuclear norm and the log-determinant
heuristic for rank
A very effective improvement of the nuclear norm comes
from re-weighting it (Fazel et al., 2001; Mohan & Fazel,
2010) based on the log-determinant heuristic for rank. To
motivate it, we first describe a closely related approach in
the vector case (where instead of searching for low-rank
matrices one would like to find sparse vectors). Suppose
that we seek a sparse solution to a general convex optimization problem. A popular approach
penalizes the `1 -norm
P
of the solution x kxk1 = i |xi | to encourage sparse solutions. A dramatic improvement in finding sparse signals
can
P be obtained simply by using the weighted `1 -norm, i.e.
i wi |xi | with suitable positive weights wi (Candes et al.,
2008) instead of a plain `1 -norm. Ideally the weights would
be based on the unknown signal, to provide a closer approximation to sparsity (`0 -norm) by penalizing large elements less than small ones. A practical solution first solves
a problem involving the unweighted `1 -norm, and uses the
1
, with δ a small
solution x̂ to define the weights wi = δ+|x̂
i|
positive constant. This iterative approach can be seen as an
iterative P
local linearization of the concave log-penalty for
sparsity, i log(δ + |xi |) (Fazel et al., 2001; Candes et al.,
2008). In both empirical and emerging theoretical studies(Needell, 2009; Khajehnejad et al., 2009) re-weighting
the `1 -norm has been shown to provide a tighter relaxation
of sparsity.
In a similar way, the re-weighted nuclear norm tries to penalize large singular values less than small ones by introducing positive weights. There is an analogous direct connection to the iterative linearization for the concave log-det
relaxation of rank (Mohan & Fazel, 2010). Recall that the
problem of minimizing the nuclear norm subject to convex
lent to the `1 -norm of the diagonal elements.

set constraints C,
min kAk∗ such that A ∈ C,

(5)

has a semi-definite programming (SDP) representation
(Fazel et al., 2001). Introducing auxiliary symmetric p.s.d.
matrix variables Y, Z  0, we rewrite it as:


Y
A
min tr(Y ) + tr(Z) s.t. T
 0, A ∈ C (6)
A
Z
A,Y,Z
Instead of using the convex nuclear norm relaxation, it has
been suggested to use the concave log-det approximation
to rank:
min log det(Y + δI) + log det(Z + δI)


Y
A
s.t. T
 0, A ∈ C
A
Z

A,Y,Z

(7)

Here I is the identity matrix and δ is a small positive constant. The log-det relaxation provides a closer approximation to rank than the nuclear norm, but it is more challenging to optimize. By iteratively linearizing this objective
one obtains a sequence of weighted nuclear-norm problems
(Mohan & Fazel, 2010):
min tr((Y k + δI)−1 Y ) + tr((Z k + δI)−1 Z)


Y
A
s.t. T
 0, A ∈ C
A
Z

A,Y,Z

(8)

where Y k , Z k are obtained from the previous iteration, and
Y 0 , Z 0 are initialized as I. Let W1k = (Y k + δI)−1/2 and
W2k = (Z k + δI)−1/2 then the problem is equivalent to a
weighted nuclear norm optimization in each iteration k:
min kW1k AW2k k∗

A,Y,Z

s.t. A ∈ C

(9)

The re-weighted nuclear norm approach iteratively solves
convex weighted nuclear norm problems in (9):
Re-weighted nuclear norm algorithm:
Initialize: k = 0, W10 = W20 = I.
(1) Solve the weighted NN problem in (9) to get Ak+1 .
(2) Compute the SVD: W1k Ak+1 W2k = U ΣV T , and set
Y k+1 = (W1k )−1 U ΣU T (W1k )−1 and
Z k+1 = (W2k )−1 V ΣV T (W2k )−1 .
(3) Set W1k = (Y k + δI)−1/2 and W2k = (Z k + δI)−1/2 .
There are various ways to solve the plain and weighted
nuclear norm STLS formulations, including interior-point
methods (Toh et al., 1999) and iterative thresholding (Cai
et al., 2010). In the next section we focus on augmented
Lagrangian methods (ALM) (Bertsekas, 1982) which allow
fast convergence without using computationally expensive
second-order information.

Convex Total Least Squares

3. Fast computation via ALM
While the weighted nuclear norm problem in (9) can be
solved via an interior point method, it is computationally
expensive even for modest size data because of the need to
compute Hessians. We develop an effective first-order approach for STLS based on the augmented Lagrangian multiplier (ALM) method (Bertsekas, 1982; Lin et al., 2010).
Consider a general equality constrained optimization problem:
min f (x) such that h(x) = 0.
(10)
x

matrix variable holding the other fixed. We do not wait
for the coordinate descent to converge at each ALM step,
but rather update Λ and µ after a single iteration, following the inexact ALM algorithm in (Lin et al., 2010)3 . Finally, instead of relaxing the constraint L(E) = b, we keep
the constrained form, and follow each step by a projection
(Bertsekas, 1982).
The minimum of (13) over A is obtained by the singular
value thresholding operation (Cai et al., 2010):

Ak+1 = Sµ−1 Ā − Ek + µ−1
(14)
k Λk

ALM first defines an augmented Lagrangian function:
µ
L(x, λ, µ) = f (x) + λ h(x) + kh(x)k22
2
T

(11)

The augmented Lagrangian method alternates optimization
over x with updates of λ for an increasing sequence of µk .
The motivation is that either if λ is near the optimal dual
solution for (10), or, if µ is large enough, then the solution to (11) approaches the global minimum of (10). When
f and h are both continuously differentiable, if µk is an
increasing sequence, the solution converges Q-linearly to
the optimal one (Bertsekas, 1982). The work of (Lin et al.,
2010) extended the analysis to allow objective functions involving nuclear-norm terms. The ALM method iterates the
following steps:
Augmented Lagrangian Multiplier method

where Sγ (Z) soft-thresholds the singular values of Z =
U SV T , i.e. S̃ = max(S − γ, 0) to obtain Ẑ = U S̃V T .
The minimum of (13) over E is obtained by setting the gradient with respect to E to zero, followed by a projection4
onto the affine space defined by L(E) = b:
Ẽk+1 =


1
Λk + µk (Ā − A)
2α + µk

and

Ek+1 = ΠE:L(E)=b Ẽk+1

(15)

3.2. ALM for re-weighted nuclear-norm STLS
To use the log-determinant heuristic, i.e., the re-weighted
nuclear norm approach, we need to solve the weighted nuclear norm subproblems:
min kW1 AW2 k∗ + αkEk2F where

(1) xk+1 = arg minx L(x, λk , µk )

(16)

Ā = A + E , and L(E) = b

(2) λk+1 = λk + µk h(xk+1 )
(3) Update µk → µk+1 (we use µk = ak with a > 1).
Next, we derive an ALM algorithm for nuclear-norm STLS
and extend it to use reweighted nuclear norms based on a
solution of the Sylvester’s equations.

min kDk∗ + αkEk2F where

(17)

Ā = A + E, D = W1 AW2 , and L(E) = b

3.1. ALM for nuclear-norm STLS

Now we have two Lagrangian multipliers Λ1 and Λ2 and
the augmented Lagrangian is

We would like to solve the problem:
min kAk∗ + αkEk2F , such that

There is no known analytic thresholding solution for the
weighted nuclear norm, so instead we follow (Liu et al.,
2010) to create a new variable D = W1 AW2 and add this
definition as an additional linear constraint:

(12)

Ā = A + E, and L(E) = b

To view it as (10) we have f (x) = kAk∗ + αkEk2F and
h(x) = {Ā − A − E, L(E) − b}. Using Λ as our matrix
Lagrangian multiplier, the augmented Lagrangian is:
µ
kAk∗ +αkEk2F +tr(ΛT (Ā−A−E))+ kĀ−A−Ek2F .
E:L(E)=b
2
(13)
min

Instead of a full optimization over x = (E, A), we use
coordinate descent which alternates optimizing over each

min

E:L(E)=b

kDk∗ + αkEk2F + tr(ΛT1 (Ā − A − E)) +
tr(ΛT2 ( D − W1 AW2 )) +
µ
µ
kĀ − A − Ek2F + kD − W1 AW2 k2F (18)
2
2

3
This is closely related to the popular alternating direction of
multipliers methods (Boyd et al., 2011).
4
For many constraints of interest this projection is highly efficient: when the constraint fixes some entries Eij = 0, projection simply re-sets these entries to zero. Projection onto Toeplitz
structure simply takes an average along each diagonal, e.t.c

Convex Total Least Squares

Algorithm 1 ALM for weighted NN-STLS
Input: Ā, W1 , W2 , α
repeat
• Update D via soft-thresholding: 
Dk+1 = Sµ−1 W1 AW2 − 1/µk Λk2 .
k
• Update E as in (15).
• Solve Sylvester system for A in (19).
• Update Λk+1
= Λk1 + µk (Ā − A − E),
1
k+1
k
Λ2 = Λ2 + µk (D − W1 AW2 ) and µk → µk+1 .
until convergence

We again follow an ALM strategy, optimizing over D, E, A
separately followed by updates of Λ1 , Λ2 and µ. Note that
(Deng et al., 2012) considered a strategy for minimizing
re-weighted nuclear norms for matrix completion, but instead of using exact minimization over A, they took a step
in the gradient direction. We derive the exact update, which
turns out to be very efficient via a Sylvester equation formulation. The updates over D and over E look similar to
the un-reweighted case. Taking a derivative with respect
to A we obtain a linear system of equations in an unusual
form: −Λ1 − Wy Λ2 WZ − µ(Ā − A − E) − µW1 (D −
W1 AW2 )W2 = 0. Rewriting it, we obtain:
1
(Λ1 + W1 Λ2 W2 )+(Ā−E)+W1 DW2
µk
(19)
we can see that it is in the form of Sylvester equation arising
in discrete Lyapunov systems (Kailath, 1980):

A+W12 AW22 =

A + B1 AB2 = C

(20)

where A is the unknown, and B1 , B2 , C are coefficient matrices. An efficient solution is described in (Bartels & Stewart, 1972). These ALM steps for reweighted nuclear norm
STLS are summarized in Algorithm 1.
To obtain the full algorithm for STLS, we combine the
above algorithm with steps of re-weighting the nuclear
norm and the binary search over α as described in Section 2.1. We use it for experiments in Section 5. A faster
algorithm that avoids the need for a binary search will be
presented in a future publication.

4. Accuracy analysis for STLS
In context of matrix completion and robust PCA, the nuclear norm relaxation has strong theoretical accuracy guarantees (Recht et al., 2010; Chandrasekaran et al., 2011).
We now study accuracy guarantees for the STLS problem
via the nuclear norm and the reweighted nuclear norm approaches. The analysis is conducted in the plain TLS setting, where the optimal solution is available via the SVD,
and it gives valuable insight into the accuracy of our approach for the much harder STLS problem. In particular,

we quantify the dramatic benefit of using reweighting. In
this section we study a simplification of our STLS algorithm, where we set the regularization parameter α once
and do not update it through the iterations. The full adaptive approach from Section 2.1 is analyzed in the addendum
to this paper where we show that it can in fact recover the
exact SVD solution for plain TLS.
We first consider the problem min kA − Āk2F such that
rank(A) ≤ N − 1. For the exact solution via the SVD,
the minimum approximation error is simply the square of
2
the last singular value ErrSV D = kÂSV D − Āk2F = σN
.
The nuclear-norm approximation will have a higher error.
We solve min kA − Āk2F + αkAk∗ for the smallest choice
of α that makes A rank-deficient. A closed form solution
for A is the soft-thresholding operation with α = σN . It
subtracts α from all the singular values, making the error
2
Errnn = N σN
. While it is bounded, this is a substantial
increase from the SVD solution. Using the log-det heuristic, we obtain much tighter accuracy guarantees even when
we fix α, and do not update it during re-weighting. Let
ai = σσNi , the ratio of the i-th and the smallest singular
values. In the appendix using ‘log-thresholding’ we derive
that
!
q
X
1
2
(ai − a2i − 1)2 )
Errrw-nn ≈ σN
1+
(21)
2
i<N
1X 1
2
).
≤ σN
(1 +
2
a2i
i<N

For larger singular values the approximation is much more
accurate than for the smallest ones. In contrast, for the plain
nuclear norm approach, the errors are equally bad for the
largest and smallest singular values. Considering that natural signals (and singular value spectra) often exhibit fast
decay (exponential or power-law decay), we can quantify
the improvement. Suppose that the singular values have
exponential decay, σi = σN aN −i , with a > 1, or powerp
law decay σi = σN (N −
er i + 1)P. The approximation

√
1
2
rors are Errexp = σN 1 + 2 i<N (ai − a2i − 1)2
√

P
2
and Errp = σN
1 + 12 i<N (ip − i2p − 1)2 respectively. For exponential decay, if N = 100, and a = 1.1,
2
the approximation error is 1.84 σN
for our approach, and
2
2
N σN = 100 σN , for the nuclear norm relaxation. This is a
dramatic improvement in approximation, that strongly supports using the log-det heuristic over the nuclear norm for
approximating matrix rank!

5. Experimental Results
Our first experiment considers plain TLS, where we know
the optimal solution via the SVD. We evaluate the accuracy
of the nuclear norm (NN) and two flavors of the reweighted
nuclear norm algorithm: the full adaptive one described in

Convex Total Least Squares

Figure 1. RW-NN for plain TLS: (a) relative error in Frobenius norm for NN and full RW-NN (avg. over 100 trials) w.r.t. SVD. (b) Min,
average, and 90%-quantile relative error for the simplified non-adaptive log-det STLS relative to SVD.

Section 2.1, which we will refer to as (RW-NN), and the
simplified approach with fixed α as described in Section 4
(log-det).
We simulate random i.i.d. Gaussian matrices A of size
N × N , use a maximum of 3 re-weightings in RW-NN,
and update the ALM parameter µk as µk = 1.05k . We plot
the relative error of NN-TLS with respect to exact TLS via
SVD, i.e. the norm of error (w.o. squaring) for NN-TLS
divided by the norm of error for TLS. We compare it to the
relative error for full RW-NN TLS (again with respect to
exact TLS) in Figure 1 (a). The results are averaged over
100 independent trials.
√
The NN solution, as we expect, is a factor of N worse
than TLS in Frobenius norm. The full RW-NN always recovers the optimal TLS solution, i.e. the relative error is
exactly 1, as we establish in the addendum. The simplified
non-adaptive log-det STLS in Figure 1 (b) is almost as good
as the adaptive: the average error is only√about 1% higher
than exact TLS, dramatically better than N for plain NN.
These empirical results agree with our theoretical analysis
in Section 4.
Next, we compare NN and RW-NN for a structured TLS
problem with a pattern of entries in E fixed at 0 (entries are
fixed independently with probability 0.5). This is a practically important case where the entries of E fixed at zero
represent exact measurements while allowing other entries
to have noisy measurements. The solution of plain TLS via
SVD ignores the constraints and is infeasible for this structured problem. We still compute the relative error with respect to exact TLS to quantify the increase in error needed
to obey the imposed structure. Again, in Figure 2 (a) we
can see that the RW-NN solution provides much better accuracy than NN, and not far worse than 1, the infeasible
lower-bound given by plain TLS.
Next we consider Toeplitz structured errors, which means
that the matrix E is constant on the diagonals:


e1
 e0

e−1
...

e2
e1
e0
...

e3
e2
e1
...


...
...

...
...

(22)

Toeplitz structure arises in time-series modeling, analysis
of linear systems, and system identification, as the convolution operation can be represented as a multiplication by a
Toeplitz matrix (Kailath, 1980). We simulate the Toeplitz
entries at the start of each diagonal as i.i.d. Gaussian. The
Toeplitz structure is quite restrictive, with only M + N − 1
degrees of freedom instead of O(M N ). However, we reach
a similar conclusion as we had before: RW-NN solution
provides much better accuracy than NN, much closer to the
infeasible lower-bound via plain TLS. We show the results
for STLS with Toeplitz structure in Figure 2(b).
Finally, we compare our re-weighted nuclear norm approach to the latest widely used non-convex solver for
STLS, SLRA (Markovsky & Usevich, 2014). The success
of non-convex solvers depends heavily on a good initialization. We consider a problem with a block-diagonal structure where some entries are corrupted by large outliers. The
weights on these entries are set to be very small, so an ideal
STLS solver should find the solution while minimizing the
influence of the outliers. Figure 3 shows that for moderate
levels of outliers, both RW-NN and the non-convex SLRA
approach find very accurate solutions. However, for larger
levels of noise, while RW-NN continues to have good performance, the accuracy of SLRA plummets, presumably
due to the difficulty of finding a good initialization. For this
setting we know the exact solution without outliers, and we
measure accuracy by correlation (i.e. cosine of subspace
angles) of the recovered and the exact STLS nullspaces,
averaged over 100 trials.
5.1. Quantification of cellular heterogeneity
We now demonstrate the utility of STLS for solving a broad
and important class of problems arising in biology, namely
inferring heterogeneity in biological systems. Most biological systems (such as human cancers, tissues, the human
microbiome and other microbial communities) are mixtures of cells in different physiological states or even different cell types. While the primary biomedical interest is
in characterizing the different cell types and physiological
states, experimental approaches can typically measure only
the population average across physiological states. Our aim
is to combine these readily available population-average

Convex Total Least Squares

Figure 2. Relative error in Frobenius norm for NN and RW-NN (avg. over 100 trials). The SVD solution is infeasible, providing a lower
bound 1 on the error. (a) STLS with some observed entries (b) STLS with Toeplitz structure.

measurements and use STLS to infer the distribution of
cells across distinct physiological states.
We consider a cell culture containing cells in K distinct
physiological states, such as phases of cell growth or division cycles (Slavov et al., 2011; 2012). As the growth
rate of the culture changes, the fraction of cells in each
physiological state changes. This fractional change is of
primary interest but it is often too expensive or even technologically impossible to measure directly. Since the cells
cannot be easily separated we consider the general case
when we know M indicator genes (such as cyclins) that
are either present or absent in K distinct physiological
states, S ∈ RM ×K . Existing methods for high-throughput
measurements of mRNA levels, such as DNA microarrays
and RNA-seq, can quantify relative changes of mRNA levels across different conditions but cannot accurately quantify the ratios between different mRNAs, i.e., depending
on chemical composition and the physical properties, each
RNA has its own normalization scaler accounting for biases such as GC (guanine-cytosine) content. To avoid such
biases we explicitly scale the measured relative expression
levels X ∈ RM ×N by an unknown positive diagonal matrix Z = diag(z). The goal is to find U ∈ RK×N , the fraction of cells across the K physiological states for each of N
different conditions, such as different steady-state growth
rates. Mathematically the problem is:
X = ZSU,

(23)

where we aim to recover the decomposition up-to scaling
knowing X and S only. We now study conditions for identifiability without noise, and extend it to a structured TLS
problem in presence of noise.
Linear Algebraic solution We define λ = [ z11 , ..., z1M ],
and Λ = diag(λ). Thus Λ = Z −1 . We now have to find Λ
and U :
ΛX = SU,
(24)
and both unknowns enter the equations linearly. We transpose both sides and move everything to one side to get:
U T S T − X T Λ = 0. Now let us stack columns of U T ,
i.e. rows of U into a vector, u = vec(U T ). Then

vec(U T S T ) = (S ⊗ I)u, where ⊗ stands for the Kronecker product. Similarly defining a block-diagonal matrix
blkdiag(X T ), with columns of X T (i.e. rows of X) in diagonal blocks. This way X T Λ = blkdiag(X T )λ. Combining this together we have:
 

 u
(S ⊗ I), − blkdiag(X T )
=0
(25)
λ
Any
vector in the nullspace of A
,

(S ⊗ I) − blkdiag(X T ) is a solution to this problem. If we have a single vector in the nullspace of A, then
we have a unique solution up-to scaling.
Noisy case: structured Total Least Squares approach
When the observation matrix X is corrupted by noise, it is
no longer low-rank. The structured matrix A in (25) will
only have a trivial null-space. Furthermore, the simple approach of setting the smallest singular value to zero will not
work because it ignores the structure of the compound matrix A. The errors in X correspond to errors in the blockdiagonal portions of the right part of A. Other entries are
known exactly. This is precisely the realm of structured
total least squares (STLS) that we explored in Section 2.
We will now experimentally apply our reweighted nuclear
norm approach for STLS for the cell heterogeneity quantification problem to demonstrate the inference of the fractions of cells in different physiological states. We use experimentally measured levels of 14 genes, five expressed
in HOC phase, six expressed in LOC phase, and three in
both phases, across 6 exponentially growing yeast cultures
at different growth rates. The resulting A matrix in (25)
is 84 × 26. Our algorithm infers the fraction of cells in
HOC and in LOC phase, up to a scalar factor, in close
agreement with expectations from physical measurements
in synchronized cultures (Slavov et al., 2011; Slavov &
Botstein, 2011). Thus we can extend the observed trend
to asynchronous cultures where this fraction is very hard
to measure experimentally. Such analysis can empower
research on cancer heterogeneity that is a major obstacle
to effective cancer therapies. This modest size experiment
provides a proof of concept and we are pursuing applications to more complex biological systems.

1

Fraction of Cells

Inference Accuracy (corr)

Convex Total Least Squares

0.5

0.8
0.6

0.4

0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4

Non-Convex SLRA

0.2

Convex STLS

0.1

−0.6
−0.8

0
0.05

−1

Low Noise

Med Noise

0.1

6. Appendix: Error analysis for re-weighted
STLS
To gain insight into the re-weighted nuclear norm we consider the diagonal case first, where A = diag(x). The diagonal matrix case penalizing rank of A is equivalent to
the vector problem penalizing sparsity of x, so we use the
vector notation for simplicity. As both the Frobenius and
nuclear norms are unitarily invariant5 , the analysis directly
extends to the non-diagonal case.
The log heuristic forPsparsity solves the following problem:
min 21 kx−yk22 +α i log(δ+|xi |), for a very small δ > 0.
This is a separable problem with a closed form solution for
each coordinate6 (contrast this with the soft-thresholding
operation):

 
p
√
1
2


 2 (yi − δ) + (yi − δ) − 4(α − yi δ) , yi > 2 α
p
xi = 1 (yi + δ) − (yi + δ)2 − 4(α + yi δ) , yi < −2√α
2



0, otherwise
(26)

Assuming that δ is negligible, then we have:

p
√
1
2

α
 2 (yi + pyi − 4α), if yi > 2 √
1
2
xi ≈ 2 (yi − yi − 4α), if yi < −2 α


0, otherwise,

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

Growth Rate, h−1

High Noise

Figure 3. Comparison of convex STLS (RW-NN) with nonconvex SLRA and SVD on problems with large outliers. At lownoise all the solvers are accurate, but only RW-NN remains accurate at high noise. We measure accuracy by correlation with the
exact solution. We present the distribution of correlations over
100 trials as a boxplot.

(27)

and we chose α to annihilate the smallest entry in x, i.e.
α = 14 mini yi2 . Sorting the entries in |y| in increasing
|yi |
, we have
order, with y0 = ymin , and defining ai = |y
0|
ai ≥ 1 and the error in approximating the i-th entry, for
Taking the SVD A = U SV T we have kU SV k2F = kSk2F
and kU SV k∗ = kSk∗ since U , V are unitary.
6
For√δ small enough, the global minimum is always at 0, but
if y > 2 α there is also a local minimum with a large domain of
attraction between 0 and y. Iterative linearization methods with
small enough step size starting at y will converge to this local
minimum.
5

HOC Phase
LOC Phase

0.3

SVD

Figure 4. STLS infers accurate fractions of cells in different physiological phases from measurements of population-average gene
expression across growth rate.

i > 0 is
Erri = |xi −yi |2 =

y02
2

2

q
y2
ai − a2i − 1 ≤ 02 . (28)
2ai

Also, by our choice of α, we have Err0 = y02 for i = 0.
The approximation error quickly decreases for larger entries. In contrast, for `1 soft-thresholding, the errors of approximating large entries are as bad as the ones for small
entries. This analysis extends directly to the log-det heuristic for relaxing matrix rank.

7. Conclusions
We considered a convex relaxation for a very rich class of
structured TLS problems, and provided theoretical guarantees. We also developed an efficient first-order augmented
Lagrangian multipliers algorithm for reweighted nuclear
norm STLS, which can be applied beyond TLS to matrix
completion and robust PCA problems. We applied STLS
to quantifying cellular heterogeneity from population average measurements. In future work we will study STLS with
sparse and group sparse solutions, and explore connections
to robust LS (El Ghaoui & Lebret, 1997).

Convex Total Least Squares

References
Bartels, R. H. and Stewart, G. W. Solution of the matrix
equation AX+ XB = C. Communications of the ACM, 15
(9):820–826, 1972.
Beck, A. and Ben-Tal, A. A global solution for the structured total least squares problem with block circulant
matrices. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applic.,
27(1):238–255, 2005.
Bertsekas, D. P. Constrained Optim. and Lagrange Multiplier Methods. Academic Press, 1982.
Boyd, S., Parikh, N., Chu, E., Peleato, B., and Eckstein, J.
Distributed optimization and statistical learning via the
alternating direction method of multipliers. Foundations
and Trends in Machine Learning, 3(1):1–122, 2011.
Cai, J., Candes, E. J., and Shen, Z. A singular value thresholding algorithm for matrix completion. SIAM Journal
on Optim., 20(4):1956–1982, 2010.
Candes, E. J., Wakin, M. B., and Boyd, S. P. Enhancing
sparsity by reweighted l1 minimization. J. of Fourier
Analysis and Applic., 14(5):877–905, 2008.

Liu, G., Lin, Z., Yan, S., Sun, J., Yu, Y., and Ma, Y. Robust
recovery of subspace structures by low-rank representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1010.2955, 2010.
Markovsky, I. and Usevich, K. Software for weighted
structured low-rank approximation. J. Comput. Appl.
Math., 256:278–292, 2014.
Markovsky, I. and Van Huffel, S. Overview of total leastsquares methods. Signal processing, 87(10):2283–2302,
2007.
Markovsky, I., Willems, J. C., Van Huffel, S., De Moor,
B., and Pintelon, R. Application of structured total least
squares for system identification and model reduction.
Automatic Control, IEEE Trans. on, 50(10):1490–1500,
2005.
Mohan, K. and Fazel, M. Reweighted nuclear norm minimization with application to system identification. In
American Control Conference, 2010.
Needell, D. Noisy signal recovery via iterative reweighted
l1-minimization. In Forty-Third Asilomar Conference
on Signals, Systems and Computers, 2009, pp. 113–117.
IEEE, 2009.

Chandrasekaran, V., Sanghavi, S., Parrilo, P. A., and Willsky, A. S. Rank-sparsity incoherence for matrix decomposition. SIAM Journal on Optim., 21(2), 2011.

Recht, B., Fazel, M., and Parrilo, P. A. Guaranteed
minimum-rank solutions of linear matrix equations via
nuclear norm minimization. SIAM Review, 52(3):471–
501, 2010.

Deng, Y., Dai, Q., Liu, R., Zhang, Z., and Hu, S. Low-rank
structure learning via log-sum heuristic recovery. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1012.1919, 2012.

Slavov, N. and Botstein, D. Coupling among growth rate
response, metabolic cycle, and cell division cycle in
yeast. Molecular bio. of the cell, 22(12), 2011.

El Ghaoui, L. and Lebret, H. Robust solutions to leastsquares problems with uncertain data. SIAM J. on Matrix
Analysis and Applic., 18(4):1035–1064, 1997.

Slavov, N., Macinskas, J., Caudy, A., and Botstein, D.
Metabolic cycling without cell division cycling in respiring yeast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(47), 2011.

Fazel, M., Hindi, H., and Boyd, S. P. A rank minimization heuristic with application to minimum order system
approximation. In IEEE American Control Conference,
2001.
Golub, G. H. and Van Loan, C. F. An analysis of the total least squares problem. SIAM Journal on Numerical
Analysis, 17(6):883–893, 1980.

Slavov, Nikolai, Airoldi, Edoardo M., van Oudenaarden,
Alexander, and Botstein, David. A conserved cell growth
cycle can account for the environmental stress responses
of divergent eukaryotes. Molecular Biology of the Cell,
23(10):1986–1997, 2012.
Srebro, N. and Jaakkola, T. Weighted low-rank approximations. In Int. Conf. Machine Learning (ICML), 2003.

Kailath, T. Linear systems. Prentice-Hall, 1980.
Khajehnejad, A., Xu, W., Avestimehr, S., and Hassibi, B.
Weighted `1 minimization for sparse recovery with prior
information. In IEEE Int. Symposium on Inf. Theory,
2009., pp. 483–487, 2009.
Lin, Z., Chen, M., and Ma, Y. The augmented Lagrange
multiplier method for exact recovery of corrupted lowrank matrices. arXiv preprint arXiv:1009.5055, 2010.

Toh, K. C., Todd, M. J., and Tütüncü, R. H. SDPT3 – a
Matlab software package for semidefinite programming,
version 1.3. Optim. Method. Softw., 11(1–4):545–581,
1999.
Zhu, H., Giannakis, G. B., and Leus, G. Weighted and
structured sparse total least-squares for perturbed compressive sampling. In IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Proc., 2011.

