Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models:
The High-Dimensional Setting

Yudong Chen
YUDONG . CHEN @ EECS . BERKELEY. EDU
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94704, USA
Jiaming Xu
Department of ECE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA

Abstract
The planted models assume that a graph is generated from some unknown clusters by randomly
placing edges between nodes according to their
cluster memberships; the task is to recover the
clusters given the graph. Special cases include
planted clique, planted partition, planted densest subgraph and planted coloring. Of particular interest is the high-dimensional setting where
the number of clusters is allowed to grow with
the number of nodes. We show that the space
of model parameters can be partitioned into
four disjoint regions: (1) the impossible regime,
where all algorithms fail; (2) the hard regime,
where the computationally intractable Maximum
Likelihood Estimator (MLE) succeeds, and no
polynomial-time method is known; (3) the easy
regime, where the polynomial-time convexified
MLE succeeds; (4) the simple regime, where
a simple counting/thresholding procedure succeeds. Moreover, each of these algorithms provably fails in the previous harder regimes. Our
theorems establish the first minimax recovery results for the high-dimensional setting, and provide the best known guarantees for polynomialtime algorithms. These results demonstrate the
tradeoffs between statistical and computational
considerations.

1. Introduction
The planted models are standard models for generating
a random graph from the underlying clustering structure.
We consider a general setup called the planted clustering
model. The model assumes that rK out of a total n nodes
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP volume 32. Copyright 2014 by the author(s).

JXU 18@ ILLINOIS . EDU

are grouped into r clusters of equal size K, while the other
n−rK nodes (called isolated nodes) are not in any clusters;
each pair of nodes are connected by an edge independently
with probability p if they are in the same cluster, and with
probability q otherwise. The goal is to recover the underlying unknown clusters given the graph.
We are particularly interested in the so-called highdimenional setting (Rohe et al., 2011) where the number
r of clusters may grow unbounded with the problem dimensions n. This setting is important in many empirical
networks (Leskovec et al., 2008), and more challenging to
analyze than the r = Θ(1) setting. The parameters p, q and
K can scale with n as well.
The formulation above covers many classical planted problems including planted clique/r-clique (Alon et al., 1998;
McSherry, 2001), planted coloring (Alon & Kahale, 1997),
planted densest subgraph (Arias-Castro & Verzelen, 2013),
planted partition and the stochastic blockmodel (Holland
et al., 1983; Condon & Karp, 2001). These models have
a broad range of applications: They are used as generative
models for approximating real world networks with natural
cluster/community structures (Fortunato, 2010), and serve
as benchmarks in the evaluation of clustering and community detection algorithms (Newman & Girvan, 2004); they
also provide a standard venue for studying the average-case
behaviors of NP-hard graph theoretic problems including
max-clique, max-cut, graph partitioning and coloring (Bollobás & Scott, 2004).
The planted clustering problems pose themselves as both
statistical and computational problems. Statistically, the
parameters n, r, K, p, q govern the “noisiness” of the problems: The problems become statistically harder with
smaller values of p − q, K and larger r, as the observations
are noisier and the cluster structures are more complicated
and weakly expressed in the data. A statistically powerful
algorithm is one that can recover the clusters for a large
range of model parameters.

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

Computationally, we are concerned with the running-time
of different algorithms. An exhaustive search over all possible clusterings might make for a statistically powerful algorithm but has high time-complexity. A simpler algorithm
with polynomial or even linear running time is computationally more desirable, but might succeed for a smaller
region of the parameter space and thus have less statistical
power.
Here we take a joint statistical-computational view to
planted clustering, and try to understand the tradeoffs between these two aspects: How do algorithms with different computational time achieve different statistical performance? For what regions of the parameter space is recovery infeasible, either for any algorithm, or for an algorithm
with specific computational time?
Our results highlight the following: The parameter space
can be partitioned into four regions, where each region corresponds to successively easier instances of the problem
than the previous region statistically, and recovery can be
achieved by simpler algorithms with lower time complexities. Significantly, there are large gaps between the statistical performance of computationally expensive algorithms
and computationally efficient algorithms. We elaborate below.

the hard regime above.
. √
2
n
• The Simple Regime: (p−q)
q(1−q) & K . A simple algorithm based on counting degrees and common neighbors recovers the clusters with high probability in this
regime, and provably fails outside this regime (i.e., in
the hard and easy regimes).
We illustrate these four regimes in Figure 1 assuming p =
2q = Θ(n−α ) and K = Θ(nβ ). Here cluster recovery
is harder with larger α and smaller β. In this setting, the
four regimes correspond to four disjoint and non-empty regions of the parameter space. Therefore, a computationally
more complicated algorithm leads to a significant (orderwise) enhancement in statistical power. For example, when
p = 2q = n−1/4 , the cluster sizes K that can be handled
by the simple, polynomial-time and computationally expensive algorithms are Ω(n0.75 ), Ω(n0.625 ) and Ω(n0.25 ),
respectively.
β
1
simple

1/2

easy

hard
impossible

1.1. The Four Regimes for Planted Clustering
For concreteness, we first consider the setting with r ≥ 2,
p > q and p/q = Θ(1). This covers the standard planted
partition and planted r-clique models. The statistical hardness of the cluster recovery problem can be summarized
2
by the quantity (p−q)
q(1−q) , essentially a measure of the Signalto-Noise Ratio. Our main theorems identify the following
four regimes of the problem defined by the values of this
quantity.
2

.

1 1
• The Impossible Regime: (p−q)
In this
q(1−q) . K .
regime, there is no algorithm, regardless of its computational complexity, that can recover the clusters with
reasonable probability.
.
.
2
1
n
• The Hard Regime: K
. (p−q)
q(1−q) . K 2 . The computationally expensive Maximum Likelihood Estimator (MLE) recovers the clusters with high probability in this regime (as well as in the next two easier
regimes; we omit such implications in the sequel). No
polynomial-time algorithm is known √
for this regime.
.
.
(p−q)2
n
• The Easy Regime: K 2 . q(1−q) . Kn . There exists
a polynomial-time algorithm – a convex relaxation of
the MLE – which recovers the clusters with high probability here. Moreover, this algorithm provably fails in
1

.

.

The notations & and . ignore constant and log n factors; &
and . ignore constant factors.

0

1/2

1

α

Figure 1. Illustration of the four regimes. It applies to the planted
clustering problem with p = 2q = Θ(n−α ) and K = Θ(nβ ), as
well as the submatrix localization problem with nL = nR = n,
µ2 = Θ(n−α ) and KL = KR = Θ(nβ ).

The results in the impossible and hard regimes together establish the minimax recovery boundary of the planted clustering problem, and show that MLE is statistically optimal.
These two regimes are separated by an “information barrier”: In the impossible regime the graph does not carry
enough information about the clusters, so recovery is statistically impossible.
We conjecture that no polynomial-time algorithm succeeds
in the hard regime. This will mean the convex relaxation
of MLE achieves the computational limit. While rigorously proving the conjecture is difficult, there are many
evidences supporting it. The hard regime contains the √
standard Planted Clique problem with clique size K = o( n),
which has no polynomial-time algorithms so far despite
decades of effort and is widely believed to be computationally intractable (Juels & Peinado, 2000). Moreover, there is
a “spectral barrier”, determined by the spectral norm of an
appropriately defined noise matrix, that prevents the convexified MLE and spectral algorithms, and possibly many

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

other polynomial-time algorithms as well, from succeeding
in the hard regime.
The simple counting algorithm fails outside the simple
regime due to a variance barrier associated with the node
degrees and the numbers of common neighbors. Therefore,
the simple algorithm is order-wise weaker statistically than
the convexified MLE.
General results: Our main theorems apply to general values of p, q, K and r. The four regimes and the statisticalcomputational tradeoffs can be observed for a broad spectrum of planted models. We discuss them in the main result
section.
1.2. Extensions to Submatrix Localization
Similar results hold for the related submatrix localization
problem, a.k.a. bi-clustering (Kolar et al., 2011). Here
we assume A ∈ RnL ×nR is a random matrix with i.i.d.
Gaussian entries with unit variance, where there are r submatrices of size KL × KR with disjoint row and column
supports, such that the entries inside the submatrices have
mean µ > 0, and the entries outside have mean zero. The
goal is to locate these submatrices given A. We allow r
to grow unbounded. This generalizes the single-submatrix
model previously studied (Balakrishnan et al.; Arias-Castro
et al., 2011).
The quantity µ2 measures the Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(SNR). Most interesting is the low SNR setting with µ2 =
O(log n). Suppose nL = nR = n and KL = KR = K;
the problem has the following four regimes, with the same
meaning as before:
.

1
.
. K
n
1
2
Hard Regime: K . µ . K 2 .
.
. √
Easy Regime: Kn2 . µ2 . Kn .
√
.
.
Simple Regime: Kn . µ2 . 1.

• The Impossible Regime: µ2 .
.

• The
• The
• The

We illustrate these regimes in Figure 1 assuming µ2 =
Θ(n−α ) and K = Θ(nβ ). Complete results will be provided in a forthcoming full paper.
1.3. Discussions
The results above highlight the interaction between the statistical and computational considerations in planted clustering and submatrix localization. Our study parallels a recent
line of work that takes a joint statistical and computational
view on learning problems (e.g., Berthet & Rigollet (2013);
Chandrasekaran & Jordan (2013)). While we investigate
two specific problems, we expect that the phenomena and
principles in this paper are relevant more generally. Below
we provide additional discussions on our innovation compared to previous work.

The high dimensional setting: Several recent works investigate the statistical-computational tradeoffs in submatrix detection/localization (Kolar et al., 2011; Ma & Wu,
2013), planted densest subgraph detection (Arias-Castro &
Verzelen, 2013) and sparse PCA (Berthet & Rigollet, 2013;
Krauthgamer et al., 2013). Even earlier is the extensive
study of the Planted Clique problem. The majority of these
previous works focus on the setting with a single clique,
cluster, submatrix or principal component (i.e., r = 1).
In this paper, we study the more general high-dimensional
setting with a growing of clusters/submatrices, which is
more difficult and poses significant challenge to the analysis. Moeover, there are qualitative differences between
these two settings, where are discussed in the next paragraph.
The power of convex relaxations: In previous work on the
r = 1 setting of submatrix localization (Kolar et al., 2011)
and sparse PCA (Krauthgamer et al., 2013), it is shown that
very simple algorithms based on thresholding/averaging
have the order-wise similar statistical performance as more
sophisticated convex optimization approaches. In contrast,
for planted clustering and submatrix localization with multiple clusters/submatrices, we show that convex relaxation
approaches are order-wise statistically more powerful than
simple counting/thresholding. Our analysis reveals that
the power of convex relaxations lies in separating different clusters/submatrices, but not in identifying a single
cluster/submatrix. This demonstrates a finer spectrum of
computational-statistical tradeoffs.
Detection vs. estimation: Several recent works on planted
densest subgraph (Arias-Castro & Verzelen, 2013), submatrix detection (Ma & Wu, 2013) and sparse PCA (Berthet
& Rigollet, 2013) have focused on the detection or hypothesis testing version of the problems, i.e., deciding whether
or not there is a structured cluster/submatrix/principal component. In this paper, we study the estimation problem, i.e.,
to estimate the locations of the clusters/submatrices. If we
compare Figure 1 in this paper with Figure 1 in (Ma &
Wu, 2013), we see that submatrix localization is strictly
harder than its detection counterpart. We have a similar observation for planted densest subgraph by comparing
with (Arias-Castro & Verzelen, 2013). Conditional computational hardness results have been obtained for the detection of submatrix and sparse principal component (Ma &
Wu, 2013; Berthet & Rigollet, 2013), and it is interesting
to see if similar results can be obtained for the estimation
problems here.
1.4. Main Technical Contributions
We consider the general planted clustering model, which
allows for a growing number of clusters and covers many
existing models including planted clique, planted partition

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

and planted coloring.
• We obtain minimax lower bounds for planted clustering, and then prove that the computationally expensive Maximum-Likelihood Estimator achieves the
lower bounds. This establishes the minimax recovery
boundary for various planted models, and is the first
such result for the setting with an arbitrarily growing
number of clusters.
• We consider a polynomial-time algorithm based on
a convex relaxation of the MLE, and obtain nearly
matching sufficient and necessary conditions for the
success of the algorithm. It shows that the algorithm does no achieve the statistical limit. Our performance guarantee improves upon all existing ones
for polynomial-time algorithms.
• We analyze a simple algorithm based on counting
node degrees and common neighbors, for which we
obtain nearly matching sufficient and necessary conditions for success. Our necessary condition is the
first such result for general planted clustering, and it
reveals that the counting algorithm is less powerful in
separating different clusters compared to the more sophisticated convexified MLE.

2. Related Work
There is a vast literature on graph clustering and their extensions. Here we focus on planted clustering and its special cases, and primarily on theoretical work that studies
exact cluster recovery. Detailed comparisons are provided
after each of our main theorems.
Planted Clique/Densest Subgraph: Planted Clique is the
most widely studied planted
√ model. It is known that a
clique with size K = Ω( n log n) can be easily√identified
by counting degrees (Kučera, 1995); if K = Ω( n), various polynomial-time algorithms work (Dekel et al., 2010);
if K = Ω(log n), an exhaustive search in super-polynomial
time succeeds (Alon et al., 1998); if K = o(log n), recovery is statistically impossible. It is an open problem
√
to find polynomial-time algorithms for the K = o( n)
regime, which is widely believed to be intractable (Juels &
Peinado, 2000). The four regimes here can be considered
the r = 1 special case of our results for general planted
clustering. Extension to general values of p and q, namely
planted densest subgraph, has also been considered (AriasCastro & Verzelen, 2013).
Planted r-Cliques, Partition and Coloring: Subsequent
works consider r ≥ 1 planted cliques, and the planted partition setting (Condon & Karp, 2001) with general values
of r, p and q. Existing work focus on the statistical performance of polynomial-time algorithms. The state-of-art results are given in (McSherry, 2001; Ames & Vavasis, 2014;

Chen et al., 2012) for planted r-clique and in (Chen et al.,
2012; Anandkumar et al., 2013) for planted partition. The
p < q setting is called the heterophily case, with planted
coloring (p = 0) as an important special case (Alon & Kahale, 1997).
Converse Results for Planted Problems: Complementary
to the achievability results above, another line of work studies converse results, i.e., when recovery is impossible, either by any algorithm, or by any algorithm in a specific
class. The K = Θ(n) case is considered by Chaudhuri
et al. (2012)
p and Chen et al. (2012), who establish that
p − q & p/n is necessary for any algorithm. For spectral
clustering algorithms and convex optimization approaches,
more stringent conditions are needed (Nadakuditi & Newman, 2012; Vinayak et al., 2014). We generalize and improve upon these existing converse results.
Sparse PCA: A similar gap between the statistical
power of computationally expensive algorithms and known
polynomial-time algorithms is observed for the sparse PCA
problem. The computational hardness for detecting a single sparse principal component is proved in the seminal
work (Berthet & Rigollet, 2013) conditioned on the hardness of planted clique detection.

3. Main Results
We now define the planted clustering problem, which has
five parameters n, r, K, p and q.
Definition 1 (Planted Clustering). Suppose n nodes are divided into two subsets V1 and V2 with |V1 | = rK and
|V2 | = n − rK. The nodes in V1 are partitioned into r
∗
| =
clusters C1∗ , . . . , Cr∗ (called true clusters), where |Cm
K, ∀m. The nodes in V2 do not belong to any clusters and
are called isolated nodes. A random graph is generated as
follows: for each pair of nodes and independently of all
others, we connect them by an edge with probability p if
they are in the same cluster, and with probability q otherwise.
∗
The goal is to exactly recover the true clusters {Cm
} given
the graph. We emphasize that K, r, p and q are allowed
to scale with n. We assume the values of (p, q, r, K) are
known to the algorithms.

To facilitate subsequent discussion, we introduce a matrix
representation of the problem. We represent the true clus∗ r
ters {Cm
}m=1 by a cluster matrix Y ∗ ∈ {0, 1}n×n , where
∗
Yii = 1 if and only if i ∈ V1 , and Yij∗ = 1 if and only if
nodes i and j are in the same cluster. Note that the rank of
Y ∗ equals r. The adjacency matrix of the graph is denoted
as A, with the convention that Aii = 0 for all i. Under
the planted clustering model, we have P(Aij = 1) = p if
Yij∗ = 1 and P(Aij = 1) = q if Yij∗ = 0 for all i 6= j. The
problem reduces to recovering Y ∗ given A.

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

The above formulation covers many classical models.
• Planted r-Disjoint-Clique: Here p = 1 and 0 < q <
1, so there are r cliques of size K “planted” into an
Erdős-Rényi random graph G(n, q). The special case
with r = 1 is known as planted clique.
• Planted Densest Subgraph: Here 0 < q < p < 1
and r = 1, so there is a dense subgraph of size K
planted into a G(n, q) graph.
• Planted Partition/stochastic blockmodel: Here n =
rK and 1 > p > q > 0. The special case with r = 2
is called planted bisection.
• Planted r-Coloring: Here n = rK and 0 = p < q <
1, so each cluster corresponds to a group of disconnected nodes assigned with the same color.
In the next four subsections, we present our main theorems
for the four regimes of the planted clustering problem. For
clarity of the presentation, we shall focus on the p > q
setting in the sequel, as the theorems and proofs for the
p < q setting are very much similar. We use c1 , c2 etc
to denote universal constants independent of (n, r, K, p, q).
With high probability (w.h.p.) means with probability at
least 1 − c1 n−c2 .
3.1. Impossible Regime: Minimax Lower Bounds
We first characterize the statistical limit of any algorithm
regardless of its computational complexity. Let Y be the
set of admissible cluster matrices, given by
Y = {Y |there exist clusters

{Cm }rm=1

If q = o(p), then Condition (3) is the least restrictive.
Theorem 1 is proved using an information-theoretic argument. The ratio of the RHS and LHS of (1) corresponds to
the ratio of the entropy of Y ∗ randomly chosen from Y and
the mutual information between A and Y ∗ . Therefore, the
impossible regime is due to an information/statistical barrier: the graph A does not carry enough information about
the clusters Y ∗ .
Comparison to previous work: For r = 1 and q is
bounded away from 1, our results recover the well-known
K = Θ(log n) threshold for planted clique; we show that
the same is true for r → ∞. For planted partition with
p > q and p/q = Θ(1), previous work (Chaudhuri et al.,
2012; Chen et al., 2012) considers the r = O(1) and
K = Θ(n) case; our results are tighter and apply to the
general setting.
3.2. Hard Regime: Optimal Algorithms
We show that the statistical limit in Theorem 1 is achieved
by the Maximum Likelihood Estimator given in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Maximum Likelihood Estimator (p > q)

with |Cm | = K,

and Y is the corresponding cluster matrix}.

Ŷ = arg max
Y ∈Y

We use Ŷ ≡ Ŷ (A) to denote an estimator which outputs
an element of Y as an estimate of the true Y ∗ . We have the
following lower bound on the minimax error probability of
recovering Y ∗ .
Theorem 1. Suppose that 8 ≤ K ≤ n/2, n ≥ 128 and
p > q. If any one of the following conditions holds:
4K(p − q)2 ≤ q(1 − q) log (n/K) ,

(1)

12K(p − q)2 ≤ min{p(1 − p), q(1 − q)} log(n − K), (2)
16Kp ≤ 1,
i
then inf Ŷ supY ∗ ∈Y P Ŷ 6= Y ∗ ≥ 12 .

• Planted r-clique: K(1 − q) . log(n/K).
• Planted r-coloring: Kq . log r.
• Planted partition/densest subgraph with p bounded
away from 1: K(p − q)2 . q log n.

(3)

X

Aij Yij

(4)

i,j

Enumerating over the set Y is computationally expensive
in general since |Y| = Ω(erK ). The following theorem
provides success condition for the MLE.
Theorem 2. Suppose K ≥ 8 and p > q. With high probability, the optimal solution Ŷ to (4) is unique and equals to
Y ∗ provided that for some constant c1 > 0
K(p − q)2 ≥ c3 p(1 − q) log n.

(5)

h

The theorem shows that it is fundamentally impossible
to recover the clusters with reasonable probability in the
regime where (1), (2) or (3) holds, which is thus called the
impossible regime. If p/q = Θ(1), then the condition (2)
is the least restrictive when p is bounded away from 1 and
the condition (1) is the least restrictive otherwise. They imply the following impossible regimes for various standard
models:

We refer to the regime for which the condition (5) holds
but (9) fails as the hard regime. When p/q = Θ(1), Con2
log n
dition (5) reduces to (p−q)
q(1−q) & K . This implies the following success conditions for the MLE:
• Planted r-clique: K(1 − q) & log n.
• Planted r-coloring: Kq & log n.
• Planted partition/densest subgraph: K(p − q)2 &
q(1 − q) log n.

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

If q = o(p), Condition (5) reduces to Kp & log n. By
comparing with Theorem 1, we see that the MLE achieves
the statistical limit up to at most a log factor and is thus
statistically optimal. In particular, if p/q = Θ(1) and p, q
are bounded away from 1, the conditions (2) and (5) match
each other up to a constant, thus establishing the minimax
2
log n
recovery boundary (p−q)
q(1−q)  K for planted clustering.
Comparison to previous work: Theorem 2 provides the
first achievability result that is information-theoretic optimal when the number of clusters grows. It shows that for
a fixed cluster size K, even if r grows, possibly at a nearly
linear rate r = O(n/ log n), MLE still succeeds under the
same condition (5). When r = p = 1, q = 1/2, our result
recovers the K  log n boundary for planted clique (Alon
et al., 1998).
3.3. Easy Regime: Polynomial-Time Methods
We present a polynomial-time algorithm that succeeds in
the easy regime described in the introduction. Our algorithm is based on taking the convex relaxation of the MLE
in Algorithm 1. Note that the objective function in the
MLE (4) is linear, so complications come from the nonconvex combinatorial constraint Y ∈ Y. To obtain a computationally tractable algorithm, we replace this constraint
with a convex trace norm constraint and a set of linear constraints. The resulting convexified MLE is given in Algorithm 2. Here the trace norm kY k∗ (also known as the nuclear norm) is the sum of the singular values of Y . Note that
the true Y ∗ is a feasible solution as kY ∗ k∗ = trace(Y ∗ ) =
rK.
Algorithm 2 Convexified Max Likelihood Estimator
Ŷ = arg max
Y

P

i,j Aij Yij

(6)

s.t. kY k∗ ≤ rK,
(7)
P
2
i,j Yij = rK , 0 ≤ Yij ≤ 1, ∀i, j. (8)

The optimization problem in Algorithm 2 can be cast as
a semidefinite program (SDP) and solved in polynomial
time. Fast specialized algorithms have also been developed (Jalali & Srebro, 2012; Chen et al., 2012).
The following theorem provides a sufficient condition for
the success of the convexified MLE.
Theorem 3 (Easy). Suppose p > q. With high probability,
the optimal solution to the problem (6)–(8) is unique and
equals to Y ∗ provided
(p − q)2 K 2 ≥ c3 (p(1 − q)K log n + q(1 − q)n) . (9)
Remark 1. Theorem 3 immediately implies guarantees for
other tighter convex relaxations. Define the sets B :=

{Y |Eq.(8) holds} and
S1 := {Y | kY k∗ ≤ n1 }, S2 := S1 ∩ {Y | kY kmax ≤ 1},
S3 := {Y | Y  0; Trace(Y ) = n1 },
where kY kmax := minK=LR> kLk∞,2 kRk∞,2 is the max
norm of Y and k · k∞,2 is the maximum of the `2 norms of
the rows. The constraint (7) is equivalent to Y ∈ S1 ∩ B.
Observe that (Jalali & Srebro, 2012)
(S1 ∩ B) ⊇ (S2 ∩ B) ⊇ (S3 ∩ B) ⊇ Y.
Therefore, if we replace the constraint (7) with Y ∈ S2 or
Y ∈ S3 , we obtain tighter convex relaxations of the MLE.
Theorem 3 immediately implies that these relaxations also
recover Y ∗ w.h.p. under (9).
When r = 1, the easy regime is where the condition (9)
holds and (12) fails. When r > 1, the easy regime is where
(9) holds and (13) fails. When p/q = Θ(1), the condi2
K log n+n
. This implies the
tion (9) reduces to (p−q)
q(1−q) &
K2
following success conditions for the convexified MLE under standard models:
n
• Planted r-clique: K(1 − q) & log n + K
.
n
• Planted r-coloring: Kq & log n + K .
• Planted partition and densest subgraph with p
n
bounded away from 1: K(p − q)2 & q(log n + K
).

In all these
√ cases, the smallest possible cluster size is
K = Θ( √n) and the largest possible number of clusters
is r = Θ( n), both achieved when p, q, |p − q| = Θ(1).
√
This generalizes the tractability threshold K = Ω( n)
of Planted Clique to the growing r setting. In the high
SNR case with q = o(p), the condition (9) reduces to
√
Kp & max{log n, qn}.
√ In this case it is possible to
go beyond the K = Ω( n) limit as the smallest possible
√
cluster size is K = Θ(max{log n, qn}), achieved when
p = Θ(1).
Converse for trace norm relaxation We have a converse
to the achievability results in Theorem 3. The following
theorem characterizes when the trace norm relaxation (6)–
(8) fails.
Theorem 4 (Easy, Converse). Suppose p > q. For any
constant 1 > 0 > 0, there exist positive constants c1 , c2
for which the following holds. Suppose c1 log n ≤ K ≤
n/2, q ≥ c1 log(n)/n and p ≤ 1 − 0 . If
K 2 (p − q)2 ≤ c2 (Kp + qn),
then w.h.p. Y ∗ is not optimal to the program (6)–(8).
Theorems 3 and 4 together establish that under the assumptions of both theorems and ignoring logarithmic factors,

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

the sufficient and necessary condition for the success of the
convexified MLE is

planted clustering problem with
(p − q)2 K 2 ≤ n− (Kp(1 − p) + q(1 − q)n) .

.

pK
qn
+ 2
. 1.
K 2 (p − q)2
K (p − q)2

(10)

Comparing this with the condition (5) for the MLE, we see
that the convexified MLE is statistically sub-optimal due to
the extra second term in (10). This term thus represents the
statistical price of computational tractability. It has an ine := A − q11> + qI be the
teresting interpretation. Let A
centered adjacency matrix. The matrix E := (Y − 11> ) ◦
e − EA),
e i.e., the deviation A
e − EA
e projected onto the
(A
cross-cluster node pairs, can be viewed as the “cross-cluster
noise matrix”2 . Note that the squared largest singular vale = (p − q)Y ∗ is K 2 (p − q)2 , and
ues of the matrix EA
the squared largest singular value of E is Θ(qn) w.h.p. by
standard results. Therefore, the extra second term in (10)
is the “Spectral Noise-to-Signal Ratio”. In fact, our proofs
for Theorems 3 and 4 build on this intuition.
We note that when K = Θ(n), the conditions (5) and (9)
coincide up to constant factors, and the performance of
MLE and its relaxation matches. In this case the hard
regime disappears.
Comparison to previous work: We refer to (Chen et al.,
2012) for a survey of the statistical performance of the
state-of-art polynomial-time algorithms for various planted
models. Theorem 3 order-wise matches and in many cases
improves upon these existing results. For planted partition,
the previous best result is (p − q)2 & p(K log4 n + n)/K 2
in (Chen et al., 2012). Our results remove a log3 n factor,
and is also sharper for small q. For planted r-clique, exist2
ing results require 1−q
√ to be Ω((rn+rK log n)/K ) (McSherry, 2001), Ω( n/K) (Ames & Vavasis, 2014) or
Ω((n + K log4 )/K 2 ) (Chen et al., 2012). We improve
them to Ω((n + K log n)/K 2 ). Our converse result in
Theorem 4 improves on the recent work by Vinayak et al.
(2014). There they focus on the special case p > 1/2 > q,
and show that a convex relaxation that is equivalent to our
formulation (6)–(8) without the equality constraint in (8)
fails when K 2 (p − 1/2)2 . qn. Our result is stronger, as
it applies to a tighter convex relaxation and a larger region
of the parameter space.
L IMITS OF POLYNOMIAL - TIME ALGORITHMS
We conjecture that no polynomial-time algorithm has
order-wised better statistical performance than the convexified MLE and succeeds beyond Condition (9).
Conjecture 1. For any constant  > 0, there is no algorithm with running time polynomial in n that, for all n and
with probability at least 1/2, outputs the true Y ∗ of the
2

◦ denotes the element-wise product.

(11)

If the conjecture is true, then the boundary of the easy
regime will characterize the computational limit of planted
clustering. This will mean there exists a significant
gap between the statistical performance of intractable and
polynomial-time algorithms.
A rigorous proof of Conjecture 1 seems difficult with
current techniques. There are however several evidences
which support the conjecture:
• The special case with√p = 1 and q = 21 corresponds
to the hard K = o( n) regime for Planted Clique,
which is widely believed to be computationally hard,
and used as an assumption for proving other hardness
results (Juels & Peinado, 2000). Conjecture 1 can be
considered as a generalization of the Planted Clique
conjecture to the setting with multiple clusters and
general values of p and q.
• As mentioned earlier, if (11) holds, then the spectrum
of the observed graph is dominated by noise and thus
fails to reveal the underlying cluster structure. The
condition (11) therefore represents a “spectral barrier” for cluster recovery. A large class of algorithms
that rely on the graph spectrum is proved to fail using this spectral barrier argument (Nadakuditi & Newman, 2012). The convexified MLE fails for a similar
reason.
• In the sparse graph case with p, q = O(1/n), Decelle
et al. (2011) use non-rigorous but deep arguments
from statistical physics to argue that all polynomialtime algorithms fail under (11).
3.4. Simple Regime: A Counting Algorithm
We consider a simple procedure in Algorithm 3 based on
counting node degrees and common neighbors.
Algorithm 3 A Simple Counting Algorithm
1. (Identify isolated nodes) For each node i, declare it as
isolated iff its degree di < (p−q)K
+ qn.
2
2. (Identify clusters when r > 1) Assign each pair of
non-isolated nodes i, j to the same P
cluster iff their
number of common neighbors Sij := k6=i,j Aik Ajk
2

K
satisfies Sij > (p−q)
+ 2Kpq + q 2 (n − 2K). Ter3
minate if inconsistency found.

The two steps in Algorithm 3 are considered in (Kučera,
1995; Dyer & Frieze, 1989) for the special cases of finding
a single planted clique or planted bisection. Let E be the set
of edges. The first step runs in time O(|E|), and the second

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

step runs in O(n|E|) since each node only needs to look up
its local neighborhood up to distance two to compute Sij .

and fails to correctly recover all the clusters with probability at least 1/4 if

The following theorem provides sufficient conditions for
the simple counting algorithm to succeed.
Theorem 5 (Simple). Suppose p > q. W.h.p. Algorithm 3
correctly identifies the isolated nodes if

K 2 (p − q)4 < c2 (Kp2 + nq 2 ) log(rK).

K 2 (p − q)2 ≥ c3 [Kp(1 − q) + nq(1 − q)] log n,

(12)

and finds the clusters if further

(15)

Remark 2. Theorem 6 requires a technical condition
Kp2 + nq 2 ≥ c1 log n, which is not too restrictive. If
Kp2 + nq 2 = o(log n), then two nodes from the same
cluster will have no common neighbor with probability
(1 − p2 )K (1 − q 2 )n−K ≥ exp[−c(p2 K + q 2 (n − K))] =
exp[−o(log n)], so Algorithm 3 cannot succeed w.h.p.

K 2 (p−q)4 ≥ c4 [Kp2 (1−q 2 ) + nq 2 (1−q 2 )] log n. (13)

Apart from the technical condition discussed above and the
assumption p < 1 − c0 , Theorems 5 and 6 show that the
When there is a single clusters r = 1, the simple regime
conditions (12) and (13) are sufficient and necessary for the
is where the condition (12) holds; if r > 1, the simple
counting algorithm. In particular, the counting algorithm
regime is where both conditions (12) and (13) holds. When
is indeed strictly weaker in separating different clusters as
p/q = Θ(1), these conditions simplify to
compared to the convexified MLE. Our proof reveals that
√
n log n
(p − q)2
n log n the R.H.S. of (12) and (13) are associated with the vari(p − q)2
&
; r>1:
&
.
r=1:
q(1 − q)
K2
q(1 − q)
K
ance of the node degrees and common neighbors, respectively. If (12) does not hold, the difference between the exThis implies the following success conditions for the countpected degrees of isolated and non-isolated nodes will be
ing algorithm under various standard models:
outweighed by their deviations; a similar argument holds
• Planted clique and densest subgraph: K 2 (p − q)2 &
for the number of common neighbors. Therefore, there is
q(1 − q)n log n.
an variance barrier that prevents the counting algorithm
√
• Planted r-clique (r > 1): K(1 − q)√& n log n.
from succeeding outside the simple regime.
• Planted r-coloring (r > 1): Kq & n log n.
Acknowledgements: Research supported in part by NSF
• Planted √
partition with p bounded away from 1: K(p −
2
ECCS 10-28464.
q) & q n log n.
Comparing these conditions with (9) for the convexified
MLE, we see that the counting algorithm requires an additional log n factor
√ on the R.H.S when r = 1, and an additional K log n/ n factor when r > 1.
The last discussion shows that in the r = 1 case where
the task is to separate isolated and non-isolated nodes, the
counting algorithm has similar (up to a log factor) statistical
performance as the more sophisticated convexified MLE,
which is the best known polynomial-time algorithm. However, when r > 1, the convexified MLE is much more powerful. In particular, its power lies in separating different
clusters, as can be seen by comparing the conditions (9)
and (13).
Converse for the counting algorithm We have a partial
converse to Theorem 5. The following theorem shows that
the conditions (12) and (13) are also nearly necessary for
the counting algorithm to succeed.
Theorem 6 (Simple, Converse). Suppose p > q. For any
constant c0 < 1, there exist constants c1 , c2 for which the
following holds. Suppose K ≤ n/2, p ≤ 1 − c0 and Kp2 +
nq 2 ≥ c1 log n. Algorithm 3 fails to identify all the isolated
nodes with probability at least 1/4 if
K 2 (p−q)2 < c2 [(Kp+nq) log(rK) + nq log(n−rK)] ,
(14)

References
Alon, N. and Kahale, N. A spectral technique for coloring
random 3-colorable graphs. SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(6):1733–1748, 1997.
Alon, N., Krivelevich, M., and Sudakov, B. Finding a large
hidden clique in a random graph. Random Structures and
Algorithms, 13(3-4):457–466, 1998.
Ames, B. P.W. and Vavasis, S. A. Convex optimization
for the planted k-disjoint-clique problem. Mathematical
Programming, 143(1-2), 2014.
Anandkumar, A., Ge, R., Hsu, D., and Kakade, S. A tensor
spectral approach to learning mixed membership community models. arXiv:1302.2684, 2013.
Arias-Castro, E. and Verzelen, N. Community detection in
random networks. arXiv:1302.7099, 2013.
Arias-Castro, E., Candès, E. J, and Durand, A. Detection
of an anomalous cluster in a network. The Annals of
Statistics, 39(1):278–304, 2011.
Balakrishnan, S., Kolar, M., Rinaldo, A., Singh, A., and
Wasserman, L. Statistical and computational tradeoffs in
biclustering. In NIPS 2011 Workshop on Computational
Trade-offs in Statistical Learning.

Statistical-Computational Phase Transitions in Planted Models

Berthet, Q. and Rigollet, P. Complexity theoretic lower
bounds for sparse principal component detection. Journal of Machine Learning Research: Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 30:1–21, 2013.
Bollobás, B. and Scott, AD. Max cut for random graphs
with a planted partition. Combinatorics, Probability and
Computing, 13(4-5):451–474, 2004.
Chandrasekaran, V. and Jordan, M. I. Computational and
statistical tradeoffs via convex relaxation. PNAS, 110
(13):E1181–E1190, 2013.
Chaudhuri, K., Graham, F. C., and Tsiatas, A. Spectral
clustering of graphs with general degrees in the extended
planted partition model. JMLR, 23, 2012.
Chen, Y., Sanghavi, S., and Xu, H.
graphs. arXiv:1210.3335, 2012.

Leskovec, J., Lang, K., Dasgupta, A., and Mahoney, M.
Statistical properties of community structure in large social and information networks. In WWW, 2008.
Ma, Z. and Wu, Y. Computational barriers in minimax submatrix detection. arXiv:1309.5914, 2013.
McSherry, F. Spectral partitioning of random graphs. In
FOCS, pp. 529 – 537, 2001.
Nadakuditi, R. R. and Newman, M.E.J. Graph spectra and
the detectability of community structure in networks.
Physical Review Letters, 108(18), 2012.
Newman, M. E. J. and Girvan, M. Finding and evaluating community structure in networks. Phys. Rev. E, 69:
026113, Feb 2004.

Clustering sparse

Condon, A. and Karp, R. M. Algorithms for graph partitioning on the planted partition model. Random Struct.
Algorithms, 18(2), 2001.
Decelle, A., Krzakala, F., Moore, C., and Zdeborova,
L. Asymptotic analysis of the stochastic block model
for modular networks and its algorithmic applications.
Physics Review E, 84:066106, 2011.
Dekel, Y., Gurel-Gurevich, O., and Peres, Y. Finding hidden cliques in linear time with high probability.
arxiv:1010.2997, 2010.
Dyer, M.E and Frieze, A.M. The solution of some random
NP-hard problems in polynomial expected time. Journal
of Algorithms, 10(4):451 – 489, 1989.
Fortunato, S.
Community detection in graphs.
arXiv:0906.0612, 2010.
Holland, P. W., Laskey, K. B., and Leinhardt, S. Stochastic
blockmodels: First steps. Social Networks, 5(2):109–
137, 1983.
Jalali, A. and Srebro, N. Clustering using max-norm constrained optimization. ICML, 2012.
Juels, A. and Peinado, M. Hiding cliques for cryptographic
security. Designs, Codes & Crypto., 2000.
Kolar, M., Balakrishnan, S., Rinaldo, A., and Singh, A.
Minimax localization of structural information in large
noisy matrices. In NIPS, 2011.
Krauthgamer, R., Nadler, B., and Vilenchik, D. Do
semidefinite relaxations really solve sparse PCA?
arXiv:1306.3690, 2013.
Kučera, L. Expected complexity of graph partitioning
problems. Discrete Appl. Math., 57(2-3), 1995.

Rohe, K., Chatterjee, S., and Yu, B. Spectral clustering and
the high-dimensional stochastic blockmodel. The Annals
of Statistics, 39(4), 2011.
Vinayak, R. K., Oymak, S., and Hassibi, B. Sharp performance bounds for graph clustering via convex optimization. In ICASSP, 2014.

