Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

Megasthenis Asteris
MEGAS @ UTEXAS . EDU
Dimitris S. Papailiopoulos
DIMITRIS @ UTEXAS . EDU
Alexandros G. Dimakis
DIMAKIS @ AUSTIN . UTEXAS . EDU
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin, TX, USA

Abstract

of high dimensional data analysis and achieves dimensionality reduction by computing the directions of maximum
variance. Typically, all n features affect positively or negatively these directions resulting in dense PCs, which explain the largest possible data variance, but are often not
interpretable.

We introduce a novel algorithm to compute nonnegative sparse principal components of positive semidefinite (PSD) matrices. Our algorithm
comes with approximation guarantees contingent
on the spectral profile of the input matrix A: the
sharper the eigenvalue decay, the better the quality of the approximation.

It has been shown that enforcing nonnegativity on the computed principal components can aid interpretability. This
is particularly true in applications where features interact only in an additive manner. For instance, in bioinformatics, chemical concentrations are nonnegative (Kim &
Park, 2007), or the expression level of genes is typically
attributed to positive or negative influences of those genes,
but not both (Badea & Tilivea, 2005). Here, enforcing nonnegativity, in conjunction with sparsity on the computed
components can assist the discovery of local patterns in
the data. In computer vision, where features may coincide with non negatively valued image pixels, nonnegative
sparse PCA pertains to the extraction of the most informative image parts (Lee & Seung, 1999). In other applications, nonnegative weights admit a meaningful probabilistic interpretation.

If the eigenvalues decay like any asymptotically
vanishing function, we can approximate nonnegative sparse PCA within any accuracy  in time
polynomial in the matrix dimension n and desired sparsity k, but not in 1/. Further, we obtain a data dependent bound that is computed
by executing an algorithm on a given data set.
This bound is significantly tighter than a-priori
bounds and can be used to show that for all
tested datasets our algorithm is provably within
40% − 90% from the unknown optimum.
Our algorithm is combinatorial and explores a
subspace defined by the leading eigenvectors of
A. We test our scheme on several data sets,
showing that it matches or outperforms the previous state of the art.

1. Introduction
Given a data matrix S ∈ Rn×m comprising m zero-mean
vectors on n features, the first principal component (PC) is
arg max xT Ax,
kxk2 =1

(1)

where A = 1/m · SST is the n × n positive semidefinite
(PSD) empirical covariance matrix. Subsequent PCs can
be computed after A has been appropriately deflated to remove the first eigenvector. PCA is arguably the workhorse
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP volume 32. Copyright 2014 by the author(s).

Sparsity emerges as an additional desirable trait of the computed components because it further helps interpretability (Zou et al., 2006; d’Aspremont et al., 2007b), even independently of nonnegativity. From a machine learning
perspective, enforcing sparsity serves as an unsupervised
feature selection method: the active coordinates in an optimal l0 -norm constrained PC should correspond to the most
informative subset of features. Although nonnegativity inherently promotes sparsity, an explicit sparsity constraint
enables precise control on the number of selected features.
Nonnegative Sparse PC. Nonnegativity and sparsity can
be directly enforced on the principal component optimization by adding constraints to (1). The k-sparse nonnegative
principal component of A is
x? = arg maxn xT Ax,
x∈Sk

(2)

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

where Snk = {x ∈ Rn : kxk2 = 1, kxk0 ≤ k, x ≥ 0}, for
a desired sparsity parameter k ∈ [n].
The problem of computing the first eigenvector (1) is easily solvable, but with the additional sparsity and nonnegativity constraints problem (2) becomes computationally intractable. The cardinality constraint alone renders sparse
PCA NP-hard (Moghaddam et al., 2006b). Even if the l0 norm constraint is dropped, we show that problem (2) remains computationally intractable by reducing it to checking matrix copositivity, a well known co-NP complete decision problem (Murty & Kabadi, 1987; Parrilo, 2000).
Therefore, each of the constraints x ≥ 0 and kxk0 ≤ k
individually makes the problem intractable.
Our Contribution: We introduce a novel algorithm for
approximating the nonnegative k-sparse principal component with provable approximation guarantees.
Given any PSD matrix A ∈ Rn×n , sparsity parameter k,
and accuracy parameter d ∈ [n], our algorithm outputs a
nonnegative, k-sparse, unit norm vector xd that achieves at
least ρd fraction of the maximum objective value in (2), i.e.,
xTd Axd ≥ ρd · x? T Ax? ,

(3)

where

ρd ≥ max

1
k
,
2n 1 + 2 nk λd+1 /λ1

the case of the rank-d update matrix A = σI + C, with
rank(C) = d and arbitrary constant σ, since the algorithm
can be equivalently applied on C.
PTAS for any spectral decay. Consider the linear sparsity
regime k = c · n and assume that the eigenvalues follow a
decay law λi ≤ λ1 · f (i) for any decay function f (i) which
vanishes: f (i) → 0 as i → ∞. Special cases include power
law decay f (i) = 1/iα or even very slow decay functions
like f (i) = 1/ log log i. For all these cases, we can solve
nonnegative sparse PCA for any desired accuracy  in time
polynomial in n and k, but not in 1/. Therefore, we obtain
a polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS) for any
spectral decay behavior.
Computable upper bounds. In addition to these theoretical guarantees, our method yields a data dependent upper
bound on the maximum value of (2), that can be computed
by running our algorithm. As it can be seen in Fig. 4-6,
the obtained upper bound, combined with our achievable
point, sandwiches the unknown optimum within a narrow
region. Using this upper bound we are able to show that
our solutions are within 40 − 90% from the optimal in all
the datasets that we examine. To the best of our knowledge,
this framework of data dependent bounds has not been considered in the previous literature.


.

(4)

Here, λi is the ith largest eigenvalue of A, and the accuracy
parameter d specifies the rank of the approximation used
and controls the running time. Specifically, our algorithm
runs in time O(nd k d +nd+1 ). As can be seen our result depends on the spectral profile of A: the faster the eigenvalue
decay, the tighter the approximation.
Near-Linear time approximation. Our algorithm has a
running time O(nd k d + nd+1 ), which in the linear sparsity
regime can be as high as O(n2d ). This can be non-practical
for large data sets, even if we set the rank parameter d to be
two or three. We present a modification of our algorithm
that can provably approximate the result of the first in nearlinear time. Specifically, for any desired accuracy  ∈ (0, 1]
bd
it computes a nonnegative, k-sparse, unit norm vector x
such that
bTd Ab
x
xd ≥ (1 − ) · ρd · x? T Ax? ,

(5)

where ρd is as described in (4). We show that the running

time of our approximate algorithm is O −d · n log n ,
which is near-linear in n for any fixed accuracy parameters
d and .
Our approximation theorem has several implications.
Exact solution for low-rank matrices. Observe that if the
matrix A has rank d, our algorithm returns the optimal ksparse PC for any target sparsity k. The same holds in

1.1. Related Work
There is a substantial volume of work on sparse PCA,
spanning a rich variety of approaches: from early heuristics in (Jolliffe, 1995), to the LASSO based techniques
in (Jolliffe et al., 2003), the elastic net l1 -regression in
(Zou et al., 2006), a greedy branch-and-bound technique in
(Moghaddam et al., 2006a), or semidefinite programming
approaches (d’Aspremont et al., 2008; Zhang et al., 2012;
d’Aspremont et al., 2007a). This line of work does not consider or enforce nonnegativity constraints.
When nonnegative components are desired, fundamentally
different approaches have been used. Nonnegative matrix
factorization (Lee & Seung, 1999) and its sparse variants
(Hoyer, 2004; Kim & Park, 2007) fall within that scope:
data is expressed as (sparse) nonnegative linear combinations of (sparse) nonnegative parts. These approaches are
interested in finding a lower dimensionality representation
of the data that reveals latent structure and minimizes a reconstruction error, but are not explicitly concerned with the
statistical significance of individual output vectors.
Nonnegativity as an additional constraint on (sparse) PCA
first appeared in (Zass & Shashua, 2007). The authors suggested a coordinate-descent scheme that jointly computes
a set of nonnegative sparse principal components, maximizing the cumulative explained variance. An l1 -penalty
promotes sparsity of computed components on average,

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

but not on each component individually. A second convex
penalty is incorporated to favor orthogonal components.
Similar convex optimization approaches for nonnegative
PCA have been subsequently proposed in the literature. In
(Allen & Maletić-Savatić, 2011) for instance, the authors
suggest an alternating maximization scheme for the computation of the first nonnegative PC, allowing the incorporation of known structural dependencies.
A competitive algorithm for nonnegative sparse PCA was
established in (Sigg & Buhmann, 2008), with the development of a framework stemming from ExpectationMaximization (EM) for a probabilistic generative model of
PCA. The proposed algorithm, which enforces hard sparsity, or nonnegativity, or both constraints simultaneously,
computes the first approximate PC in O(n2 ), i.e., time
quadratic in the number of features.
To the best of our knowledge, no prior works provide provable approximation guarantees for the nonnegative sparse
PCA optimization problem. Further, no data dependent upper bounds have been present in the previous literature.
Differences from SPCA work. Our work is closely related
to (Karystinos & Liavas, 2010; Asteris et al., 2011; Papailiopoulos et al., 2013) that introduced the ideas of solving
low-rank quadratic combinatorial optimization problems
on low-rank PSD matrices using hyperspectral transformations. Such transformations are called spannograms and
follow a similar architecture. In this paper, we extend the
spannogram framework to nonnegative sparse PCA. The
most important technical issue compared to (Asteris et al.,
2011; Papailiopoulos et al., 2013) is introducing nonnegativity constraints in spannogram algorithms.
To understand how this changes the problem, notice that
in the original sparse PCA problem without nonnegativity
constraints, if the support is known, the optimal principal
component supported on that set can be easily found. However, under nonnegativity constraints, the problem is hard
even if the optimal support is known. This is the fundamental technical problem that we address in this paper. We
show that if the involved subspace is low-dimensional, it is
possible to solve this problem.

2. Algorithm Overview
Given an n × n PSD matrix A, the desired sparsity k, and
an accuracy parameter d ∈ [n], our algorithm computes a
nonnegative, k-sparse, unit norm vector xd approximating
the nonnegative, k-sparse PC of A. We begin with a highlevel description of the main steps of the algorithm.
Step 1. Compute Ad , the rank-d approximation of A. We
compute Ad , the best rank-d approximation of A, zeroing

Algorithm 1 Spannogram Nonnegative Sparse PCA
input A (n × n PSD matrix), k ∈ [n], d ∈ [n].
1: U, Λ ← svd(A, d)
1
{Ad = VVT }
2: V = UΛ /2
3: Sd ← Spannogram(V, k)
{Algo. 2}
4: Xd ← {}
{|Sd | ≤ O(nd )}
5: for all I ∈ Sd do
6: c(I) ← arg maxkck2 =1 k (VI c) k22
{Sec. 5}
VI c≥0
(I)

(I)

7: xI ← |VI c|/kVI ck, xI c ← 0
8: Xd ← Xd ∪ {x(I) }
9: end for
output xd ← arg maxx∈Xd xT Ad x

{|Xd | ≤ |Sd |}

out the n − d trailing eigenvalues of A, that is,
Ad =

d
X

λi ui uTi ,

i=1

where λi is the ith largest eigenvalue of A and ui the corresponding eigenvector.
Step 2. Compute Sd , a set of O(nd ) candidate supports.
Enumerating the nk possible supports for k-sparse vectors
in Rn is computationally intractable. Using our Spannogram technique described in Section 4, we efficiently determine a collection
Sd of support sets, with cardinality

|Sd | ≤ 2d n+1
,
that
provably contains the support of the
d
nonnegative, k-sparse PC of Ad .
Step 3. Compute Xd , a set of candidate solutions. For
each candidate support set I ∈ Sd , we compute a candidate
solution x supported only in I:
arg

max

kxk2 =1,x≥0,
supp(x)⊆I

xT Ad x.

(6)

The constant rank of Ad is essential in solving (6): the
constrained quadratic maximization is in general NP-hard,
even for a given support.
Step 4. Output the best candidate solution in Xd , i.e., the
candidate that maximizes the quadratic form.
If multiple components are desired, the procedure is repeated after an appropriate deflation has been applied on
Ad (Mackey, 2008). The steps are formally presented in
Algorithm 1. A detailed description is the subject of subsequent sections.
2.1. Approximation Guarantees
Instead of the nonnegative, k-sparse, principal component
x? of A, which attains the optimal value OPT = x? T Ax? ,
our algorithm outputs a nonnegative, k-sparse, unit norm
vector xd . We measure the quality of xd as a surrogate of
x? by the approximation factor xd T Axd /OPT. Clearly,

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

the approximation factor takes values in (0, 1], with higher
values implying tighter approximation.
Theorem 1. For any n × n PSD matrix A, sparsity parameter k, and accuracy parameter d ∈ [n], Alg. 1 outputs a
nonnegative, k-sparse, unit norm vector xd such that
xd T Axd ≥ ρd · x? T Ax? ,
where

ρd ≥ max
in time O(n

d+1

1
k
,
2n 1 + 2 nk λd+1 /λ1


,

Equality in (9) can always be achieved by setting xI =
vI /kvI k2 if vI ≥ 0, and xI = −vI /kvI k2 if vI ≤ 0.
The support of the optimal solution x1 is the set I for which
kvI k22 in (9) is maximized under the restriction that the
entries of vI do not have mixed signs.
Def. 1. Let Ik+ (v), 1 ≤ k ≤ n denote the set of indices of
the (at most) k largest nonnegative entries in v ∈ Rn .
Proposition 3.1. Let x1be the solution to	 problem (8).
Then, supp (x1 ) ∈ S1 = Ik+ (v) , Ik+ (−v) .
The collection S1 and the associated candidate vectors via
(9) are constructed in O(n) . The solution x1 is the candidate that maximizes the quadratic.

d d

+ n k ).

The approximation guarantee of Theorem 1 relies on establishing connections among the eigenvalues of A, and the
quadratic forms xd T Axd and xd T Ad xd . The proof can
be found in the supplemental material. The complexity of
Algorithm 1 follows upon its detailed description.

3.2. Rank-d case
In the rank-d case, xd , the nonnegative, k-sparse PC of Ad
is the solution to the following problem:
max xT Ad x = maxn kVT xk22 .

x∈Sn
k

3. Proposed Scheme
Our algorithm approximates the nonnegative, k-sparse PC
of a PSD matrix A by computing the corresponding PC of
Ad , a rank-d surrogate of the input argument A:
Ad =

d
X

vi vi T = VVT ,

(7)

i=1

√

where vi = λi ui is the scaled eigenvector corresponding
to the ith largest eigenvalue of A, and V = [v1 · · · vd ] ∈
Rn×d . In this section, we delve into the details of our algorithmic developments and describe how the low rank of
Ad unlocks the computation of the desired PC.
3.1. Rank-1: A simple case

(10)

Consider an auxiliary vector c ∈ Rd , with kck2 = 1. From
the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,

2
(11)
kVT xk22 = kck22 kVT xk22 ≥ cT VT x  .
Equality in (11) is achieved if and only if c is colinear to
VT x. Since c spans the entire unit sphere, such a c exists for every x, yielding an alternative description for the
objective function in (10):

2

T 
(12)
kVT xk22 = max (Vc) x ,
c∈Sd


	
where Sd = c ∈ Rd : kck2 = 1 is the d-dimensional
unit sphere. The maximization in (10) becomes
T

max kVT xk22 = maxn max | (Vc) x|2

We begin with the rank-1 case because, besides its motivational simplicity, it is a fundamental component of the
algorithmic developments for the rank-d case.
In the rank-1 case, V reduces to a single vector in Rn and
x1 , the nonnegative k-sparse PC of A1 , is the solution to
2
maxn xT A1 x = maxn vT x .
(8)
x∈Sk

x∈Sk

x∈Sk

That is, x1 is the nonnegative, k-sparse, unit length vector
that maximizes (vT x)2 . Let I = supp(x1 ), |I| ≤ k, be the
2
P
unknown support of x1 . Then, (vT x)2 =
.
i∈I vi · xi
Since x1 ≥ 0, it should not be hard to see that the active entries of x1 must correspond to nonnegative or nonpositive
entries of v, but not a combination of both. In other words,
vI , the entries of v indexed by I, must satisfy vI ≥ 0 or
vI ≤ 0. In either case, by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
2
2
vT x = vI T xI ≤ kvI k22 kxI k22 , = kvI k22 . (9)

x∈Sn
k

x∈Sk c∈Sd ,

T

= max maxn | (Vc) x|2 .
c∈Sd ,

x∈Sk

(13)

The set of candidate supports. A first key observation is
that for fixed c, the product (Vc) is a vector in Rn . MaxiT
mizing | (Vc) x|2 over all vectors x ∈ Snk is a rank-1 instance of the optimization problem, as in (8). Let (cd , xd )
be the optimal solution of (10). By Proposition 3.1, the support of xd coincides with either Ik+ (Vcd ) or Ik+ (−Vcd ).
Hence, we can safely claim that supp(xd ) appears in
[ 
	
Sd =
Ik+ (Vc) .
(14)
c∈Sd

Naively,
one might think that Sd can contain as many as

n
distinct
support sets. In Section 4, we show that |Sd | ≤
k

2d n+1
and
present our Spannogram technique (Alg. 2)
d
for efficiently constructing Sd in O(nd+1 ). Each support
in Sd corresponds to a candidate principal component.

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

Solving for a given support. We seek a pair (x, c) that
maximizes (13) under the additional constraint that x is
supported only on a given set I. By the Cauchy-Schwarz
inequality, the objective in (13) satisfies
T

T

| (Vc) x|2 = | (VI c) xI |2 ≤ k (VI c) k22 ,

(15)

where VI is the matrix formed by the rows of V indexed
by I. Equality in (15) is achieved if and only if xI is colinear to VI c. However, it is not achievable for arbitrary c,
as xI must be nonnegative. From Proposition 3.1, we infer
that x being supported in I implies that all entries of VI c
have the same sign. Further, whenever the last condition
holds, a nonnegative xI colinear to VI c exists and equality in (15) can be achieved. Under the additional constraint
that supp(x) = I ∈ Sd , the maximization in (13) becomes
max
c∈Sd

max

x∈Sn
k
supp(x)⊆I

T

| (Vc) x|2 = max k (VI c) k22 .
c∈Sd
VI c≥0

(16)

The constraint VI c ≥ 0 in (16), is equivalent to requiring
that all entries in VI c have the same sign, since c and −c
achieve the same objective value.
The optimization problem in (16) is NP-hard. In fact, it encompasses the original nonnegative PCA problem as a special case. Here, however, the constant dimension d = Θ(1)
of the unknown variable c permits otherwise intractable operations. In Section 5, we outline an O(k d ) algorithm for
solving this constrained quadratic maximization.
The algorithm. The previous discussion suggests a twostep algorithm for solving the rank-d optimization problem in (10). First, run the Spannogram algorithm to construct Sd , the collection of O(nd ) candidate supports for
xd , in O(nd+1 ). For each I ∈ Sd , solve (16) in O(k d )
to obtain a candidate solution x(I) supported on I. Output the candidate solution that maximizes the quadratic
xT Ad x. Efficiently combining the previous steps yields
an O(nd+1 + nd k d ) procedure for approximating the nonnegative sparse PC, outlined in Alg. 1.

4. The Nonnegative Spannogram
In this section, we describe how to construct Sd , the collection of candidate supports, defined in (14) as
Sd =

[ 

	
Ik+ (Vc) ,

c∈Sd
n×d

for a given V ∈ R
. Sd comprises all support sets induced by vectors in the range of V. The Spannogram of
V is a visualization of its range, and a valuable tool in efficiently collecting those supports.

Figure 1. Spannogam of an arbitrary rank-2 matrix V ∈ R4×2 .
At a point φ, the values of the curves correspond to the entries of
a vector v(φ) in the range of V and vice versa.

4.1. Constructing S2
We describe the d = 2 case, the simplest nontrivial case, to
facilitate a gentle exposure to the Spannogram technique.
The core ideas generalize to arbitrary d and a detailed description is provided in the supplemental material.
Spherical variables. Up to scaling, all vectors v in the
range of V ∈ Rn×2 , R(V), can be written as v = Vc for
some c ∈ R2 : kck = 1. We introduce a variable φ ∈ Φ =
(−π/2, π/2], and set c to be the following function of φ:

T
c(φ) = sin(φ) cos(φ) .
The range of V, R(V) = {±v(φ) = ±Vc(φ), φ ∈ Φ}, is
also a function of φ, and in turn S2 can be expressed as
[ 
	
S2 =
Ik+ (v(φ)) , Ik+ (−v(φ)) .
φ∈Φ

Spannogram. The ith entry of v(φ) is a continuous function of φ generated by the ith row of V: [v(φ)]i =
Vi,1 sin(φ) + Vi,2 cos(φ). Fig. 1 depicts the functions corresponding to the rows of an arbitrary matrix V ∈ R4×2 .
We call this a spannogram, because at each φ, the values of
the curves coincide with the entries of a vector in the range
of V. A key observation is that the sorting of the curves
at some φ is locally invariant for most points in Φ. In fact,
due to the continuity of the curves, as we move along the
φ-axis, the set Ik+ (v(φ)) can only change at points where a
curve intersects with (i) another curve, or (ii) the zero axis;
a change in either the sign of a curve or the relative order of two curves is necessary, although not sufficient, for
Ik+ (v(φ)) to change.
Appending a zero (n + 1)th row to V, the two aforementioned conditions can be merged into one: Ik+ (v(φ)) can
change only at the points where two of the n + 1 curves intersect. Finding the unique intersection point of two curves
[v(φ)]i and [v(φ)]j for all pairs {i, j} is the key to dis-

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

covering all
There
 possible candidate support sets.n+1
 are exactly n+1
such
points
partitioning
Φ
into
+ 1 inter2
2
vals within which the set of largest k nonnegative entries of
v(φ) and −v(φ) are invariant.
Constructing S2 . The point φij where the ith and j th
curves intersect, corresponds to a vector v(φij ) ∈ R(V)
whose ith and j th entries are equal. To find it, it suffices
to compute a c 6= 0 such that (ei − ej )T Vc = 0, i.e., a
unit norm vector cij in the one-dimensional nullspace of
(ei − ej )T V. Then, v(φij ) = Vcij .
We compute the candidate support Ik+ (v(φij )) at the intersection. Assuming for simplicity that only the ith and
j th curves intersect at φij , the sorting of all curves is unchanged in a small neighborhood of φij , except the ith and
j th curves whose order changes over φij . If both the ith and
j th entries of v(φij ) or none of them is included in the k
largest nonnegative entries, then the set Ik+ (v(φ)) in the
two intervals incident to φij is identical. Otherwise, the ith
and j th curve occupy the k th and (k + 1)th order at φij , and
the change in their relative order implies that one leaves
and one joins the set of k largest nonnegative curves at φij .
The support sets associated with the two adjacent intervals
differ only in one element (one contains index i and the
other contains index j instead), while the remaining k − 1
common indices correspond to the k − 1 largest curves at
the intersection point φij . We include both in S2 and repeat
the above procedure for Ik+ (−v(φij )).
Each pairwise intersection is computed in O(1) and the at
most 4 associated candidate supports in O(n). In total, the
collection S2 comprises |S2 | ≤ 4 n+1
= O(n2 ) candidate
2
supports and can be constructed in O(n3 ).
The generalized Spannogram algorithm for constructing Sd
runs in O(nd+1 ) and is formally presented in Alg. 2. A detailed description is provided in the supplemental material.

5. Quadratic Maximization over unit vectors
in the intersection of halfspaces
Each support set I in Sd yields a candidate nonnegative,
k-sparse PC, which can be obtained by solving (16), a
quadratic maximization over the intersection of halfspaces
and the unit sphere:
c? = arg max cT Qc,
c∈Sd
Rc≥0

Algorithm 2 Spannogram algorithm for constructing Sd
input V ∈ Rn×d , k ∈ [n].
1: Sd ← {}
{Set of candidate supports in R(V)}


b ← VT 0d T
b ∈ Rn+1×d }
2: V
{Append zero row; V

n+1
3: for all d sets {i1 , . . . , id } ⊆ [n + 1] do


4:

c ← Nullspace






eTi1 − eTi2

b ∈ Rd−1×d 
...
V

eTi1 − eTid

5: for α ∈ {+1, −1} do
6:
I ← Ik+ (αVc)
{Entries ≥ than the kth one}
7:
if |I| ≤ k then
8:
Sd ← Sd ∪ {I}
{No ambiguity}
9:
else
10:
A ← {i1 , . . . , id }\{n + 1}
{Ambiguous set}
11:
T ← I\ {{i1 , . . . , id } ∪ {n + 1}}
12:
r ← k − |T |
13:
db ← |A|
b
14:
for all dr r-subsets A(r) ⊆ A} do
b ← T ∪ A(r)
15:
I
b
16:
Sd ← Sd ∪ {I}
{≤ 2d new candidates}
17:
end for
18:
end if
19:
end for
20: end for
output Sd

The objective of (Pd ) is maximized by u1 ∈ Rd , the leading eigenvector of Q. If u1 or −u1 is feasible, i.e., if it
satisfies all linear constraints, then c? = ±u1 . It can be
shown that if none of ±u1 is feasible, at least one of the k
linear constraints is active at the optimal solution c? , that
is, there exists 1 ≤ i ≤ k such that Ri,: c? = 0.
Fig. 2 depicts an example for d = 2. The leading eigenvector of Q lies outside the feasible region, an arc of the
unit-circle in the intersection of k halfspaces. The optimal
solution coincides with one of the two endpoints of the feasible region, where a linear inequality is active, motivating
a simple algorithm for solving (P2 ): (i) for each linear inequality determine a unit length point where the inequality
becomes active, and (ii) output the point that is feasible and
maximizes the objective.

(Pd )

where Q = VIT VI is a d × d matrix and R is a k × d matrix. Problem (Pd ) is NP-hard: for Q PSD and R = Id×d ,
it reduces to the original problem in (2). Here, however,
we are interested in the case where the dimension d is a
constant. We outline an O(k d ) algorithm, i.e., polynomial
in the number of linear constraints, for solving (Pd ). A
detailed proof is available in the supplemental material.

Figure 2. An instance of (P2 ): the leading eigenvector u1 of
Q ∈ S2 lies outside the feasible region (highlighted arc). The
maximum of the constrained quadratic optimization problem is
attained at φ1 , an endpoint of the feasible interval.

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

Back to the general (Pd ) problem, if a linear inequality
Ri,: c ≥ 0 for some i ∈ [k] is enforced with equality, the
modified problem can be written as a quadratic maximization in the form of (Pd ), with dimension reduced to d − 1
and k −1 linear constraints. This observation suggests a recursive algorithm for solving (Pd ): If ±u1 is feasible, it is
also the optimal solution. Otherwise, for i = 1, . . . , k, set
the ith inequality constraint active, solve recursively, and
collect candidate solutions. Finally, output the candidate
that maximizes the objective. The O(k d ) recursive algorithm is formally presented in the supplemental material.

6. Near-Linear Time Nonnegative SPCA
Alg. 1 approximates the nonnegative, k-sparse PC of a PSD
matrix A by solving the nonnegative sparse PCA problem
exactly on Ad , the best rank-d approximation of A. Albeit
polynomial in n, the running time of Alg. 1 can be impractical even for moderate values of n.
Instead of pursuing the exact solution to the low-rank nonnegative sparse PCA problem maxx∈Snk xT Ad x, we can
compute an approximate solution in near-linear time, with
performance arbitrarily close to optimal. The suggested
procedure is outlined in Algorithm 3, and a detailed discussion is provided in the supplemental material. Alg. 3
relies on randomly sampling points from the range of Ad
and efficiently solving rank-1 instances of the nonnegative
sparse PCA problem as described in Section 3.1.
Theorem 2. For any n × n PSD matrix A, sparsity parameter k, and accuracy parameters d ∈ [n] and  ∈ (0, 1],
Alg. 3 outputs a nonnegative, k-sparse, unit norm vector
bd such that
x
bTd Ab
x
xd ≥ (1 − ) · ρd · x? T Ax? ,
with probability at least 1 − 1/n, in time O −d · n log n
plus the time to compute the d leading eigenvectors of A.



7. Experimental Evaluation
We empirically evaluate the performance of our algorithm
on various datasets and compare it to the EM algorithm1 for
sparse and nonnegative PCA of (Sigg & Buhmann, 2008)
which is known to outperform previous algorithms.
CBCL Face Dataset. The CBCL face image dataset
(Sung, 1996), with 2429 gray scale images of size 19 × 19
pixels, has been used in the performance evaluation of both
the NSPCA (Zass & Shashua, 2007) and EM (Sigg & Buhmann, 2008) algorithms.
Fig. 3 depicts samples from the dataset, as well as six orthogonal, nonnegative, k-sparse components (k = 40) successively computed by (i) Alg. 3 (d = 3,  = 0.1) and
1

Matlab implementation available by the author.

Algorithm 3 Approximate Spannogram NSPCA (-net)
input A (n × n PSD matrix), k, d ∈ [n],  ∈ (0, 1]
1: [U, Λ] = svd(A, d)
1
{Ad = VVT }
2: V = UΛ /2
3: Xd = ∅
4: for i = 1 : O(−d · log n) do
5: c = randn(d, 1)
6: a = Vc/kck2
7: x = rank1solver(a)
{Section 3.1}
8: Xd = Xd ∪ {x}
9: end for
bd = arg maxx∈Xd kVT xk22
output x

(ii) the EM algorithm. Features active in one component
are removed from the dataset prior to computing subsequent PCs to ensure orthogonality. Fig. 3 reveals the ability
of nonnegative sparse PCA to extract significant parts.
In Fig. 4, we plot the variance explained by the computed
approximate nonnegative, k-sparse PC (normalized by the
leading eigenvalue) versus the sparsity parameter k. Alg. 3
for d = 3 and  = 0.1, and the EM algorithm exhibit
nearly identical performance. For this dataset, we also
compute the leading component using the NSPCA algorithm of (Zass & Shashua, 2007). Note that NSPCA does
not allow for a precise control of the sparsity of its output;
an appropriate sparsity penalty β was determined via binary search for each target sparsity k. We plot the explained
variance only for those values of k for which a k-sparse
component was successfully extracted. Finally, note that
both the EM and NSPCA algorithms are randomly initialized. All depicted values are the best results over multiple
random restarts.
Our theory allows us to obtain provable approximation
guarantees: based on Theorem 2 and the output of Alg. 3,
we compute a data dependent upper bound on the maximum variance, which provably lies in the shaded area. For
instance, for k = 180, the extracted component explains
at least 58% of the variance explained by the true nonnegative, k-sparse PC. The quality of the bound depends on
the accuracy parameters d and , and the eigenvalue decay
of the empirical covariance matrix of the data. There exist

(a)
(b)
(c)

Figure 3. We plot (a) six samples from the dataset, and the six
leading orthogonal, nonnegative, k-sparse PCs for k = 40 extracted by (b) Alg. 3 (d = 3,  = 0.1), and (c) the EM algorithm.

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees
LEUKEMIA Dataset

CBCL−FACE Dataset
1

≥ 58.7%OPT

.5

≥ 48.0%OPT
EM nns
Span (d=3, ε=0.10)
OPT UB
NSPCA (a=1e5)
NSPCA (a=1e6)
NSPCA (a=1e7)
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

Normalized Explained Variance

Normalized Explained Variance

1

≥ 57.5%OPT

.5

≥ 45.6%OPT
EM nns
Span (d=3, ε=0.10)
OPT UB
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Support Cardinality (first PC)
200

Support Cardinality (first PC)

Figure 4. CBCL dataset (Sung, 1996). We plot the normalized
variance explained by the approximate nonnegative, k-sparse PC
versus the sparsity k. Our theory yields a provable data dependent
approximation guarantee: the true unknown optimum provably
lies in the shaded area.

Figure 5. Leukemia dataset (Armstrong et al., 2001). We plot the
normalized variance explained by the output of Alg. 3 (d = 3,  =
0.1) versus the sparsity k, and compare with the EM algorithm
of (Sigg & Buhmann, 2008). By our approximation guarantees,
the maximum variance provably lies in the shaded area.

8. Conclusions

Leukemia Dataset. The Leukemia dataset (Armstrong
et al., 2001) contains 72 samples, each consisting of expression values for 12582 probe sets. The dataset was used
in the evaluation of (Sigg & Buhmann, 2008). In Fig. 5,
we plot the normalized variance explained by the computed
nonnegative, k-sparse PC versus the sparsity parameter k.
For low values of k, Alg. 3 outperforms the EM algorithm
in terms of explained variance. For larger values, the two
algorithms exhibit similar performance.
The approximation guarantees accompanying our algorithm allow us to upper bound the optimal performance.
For k as small as 50, which roughly amounts to 0.4% of the
features, the extracted component captures at least 44.6%
of the variance corresponding to the true nonnegative ksparse PC. The obtained upper bound is a significant improvement compared to the trivial bound given by λ1 .
Low Resolution Spectrometer Dataset. The Low Resolution Spectrometer (LRS) dataset, available in (Bache &
Lichman, 2013), originates from the Infra-Red Astronomy
Satellite Project. It contains 531 high quality spectra (samples) measured in 93 bands. Fig. 6 depicts the normalized
variance explained by the computed nonnegative, k-sparse
PC versus the sparsity parameter k. The empirical covariance matrix of this dataset exhibits sharper decay in the
spectrum than the previous examples, yielding tighter approximation guarantees according to our theory. For instance, for k = 20, the extracted nonnegative component
captures at least 86% of the maximum variance. For values
closer to k = 90, where the computed PC is nonnegative
but no longer sparse, this value climbs to nearly 93%.

9. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge support from NSF
grants CCF-1344364, CCF-1344179, DARPA XDATA and
research gifts by Google and Docomo.

LRS Dataset
1

Normalized
Explained Variance

datasets on which our algorithm provably achieves 70% or
even 90% of the optimal.

We introduced a novel algorithm for nonnegative sparse
PCA, expanding the spannogram theory to nonnegative
quadratic optimization. We observe that the performance
of our algorithm often matches and sometimes outperforms
the previous state of the art (Sigg & Buhmann, 2008). Even
though the theoretical running time of Alg. 3 scales better
than EM, in practice we observed similar speed, both in
the order of a few seconds. Our approach has the benefit
of provable approximation, giving both theoretical a-priori
guarantees and data dependent bounds that can be used to
estimate the variance explained by nonnegative sparse PCs,
as shown in our experiments.

≥ 83.4%OPT
.5

EM nns
Span (d=3, ε=0.10)
OPT UB

≥ 77.1%OPT
0
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Support Cardinality (first PC)

Figure 6. LRS dataset (Bache & Lichman, 2013). We plot the
normalized explained variance versus the sparsity k. Alg. 3 (d =
3,  = 0.1) and the EM algorithm exhibit similar performance.
The optimum value of the objective in (2) provably lies in the
shaded area, which in this case is particularly tight.

Nonnegative Sparse PCA with Provable Guarantees

References
Allen, Genevera I. and Maletić-Savatić, Mirjana. Sparse nonnegative generalized pca with applications to metabolomics.
Bioinformatics, 2011.
Armstrong, Scott A, Staunton, Jane E, Silverman, Lewis B,
Pieters, Rob, den Boer, Monique L, Minden, Mark D, Sallan,
Stephen E, Lander, Eric S, Golub, Todd R, and Korsmeyer,
Stanley J. Mll translocations specify a distinct gene expression
profile that distinguishes a unique leukemia. Nature genetics,
30(1):41–47, 2001.
Asteris, M., Papailiopoulos, D.S., and Karystinos, G.N. Sparse
principal component of a rank-deficient matrix. In Information
Theory Proceedings (ISIT), 2011 IEEE International Symposium on, pp. 673–677, 2011.

Kim, Hyunsoo and Park, Haesun. Sparse non-negative matrix
factorizations via alternating non-negativity-constrained least
squares for microarray data analysis. Bioinformatics, 23(12):
1495–1502, 2007.
Lee, Daniel D and Seung, H Sebastian. Learning the parts of objects by non-negative matrix factorization. Nature, 401(6755):
788–791, 1999.
Mackey, Lester. Deflation methods for sparse pca. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 21, NIPS ’08, pp. 1–8,
Vancouver, Canada, Dec 2008.
Moghaddam, B., Weiss, Y., and Avidan, S. Spectral bounds for
sparse pca: Exact and greedy algorithms. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 18:915, 2006a.

Bache, K. and Lichman, M. UCI machine learning repository,
2013. URL http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml.

Moghaddam, Baback, Weiss, Yair, and Avidan, Shai. Generalized spectral bounds for sparse lda. In Proceedings of the 23rd
international conference on Machine learning, ICML ’06, pp.
641–648, 2006b.

Badea, Liviu and Tilivea, Doina. Sparse factorizations of gene
expression guided by binding data. In Pacific Symposium on
Biocomputing, 2005.

Murty, Katta G. and Kabadi, Santosh N. Some np-complete problems in quadratic and nonlinear programming. Mathematical
Programming, 39(2):117–129, 1987.

d’Aspremont, A., El Ghaoui, L., Jordan, M.I., and Lanckriet,
G.R.G. A direct formulation for sparse pca using semidefinite
programming. SIAM review, 49(3):434–448, 2007a.

Papailiopoulos, D. S., Dimakis, A. G., and Korokythakis, S.
Sparse pca through low-rank approximations. In Proceedings
of the 30th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML ’13, pp. 767–774. ACM, 2013.

d’Aspremont, Alexandre, Bach, Francis R., and Ghaoui, Laurent El. Full regularization path for sparse principal component
analysis. In Proceedings of the 24th international conference
on Machine learning, ICML ’07, pp. 177–184, New York, NY,
USA, 2007b. ACM.

Parrilo, Pablo A. Structured Semidenite Programs and Semialgebraic Geometry Methods in Robustness and Optimization. PhD
thesis, California Institute of Technology Pasadena, California,
2000.

d’Aspremont, Alexandre, Bach, Francis, and Ghaoui, Laurent El.
Optimal solutions for sparse principal component analysis. J.
Mach. Learn. Res., 9:1269–1294, Jun 2008.

Sigg, Christian D. and Buhmann, Joachim M. Expectationmaximization for sparse and non-negative pca. In Proceedings
of the 25th International Conference on Machine Learning,
ICML ’08, pp. 960–967, New York, NY, USA, 2008. ACM.

Hoyer, Patrik O. Non-negative matrix factorization with sparseness constraints. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5:
1457–1469, 2004.

Sung, Kah-Kay. Learning and example selection for object and
pattern recognition. PhD thesis, PhD thesis, MIT, Artificial
Intelligence Laboratory and Center for Biological and Computational Learning, Cambridge, MA, 1996.

Jolliffe, I.T. Rotation of principal components: choice of normalization constraints. Journal of Applied Statistics, 22(1):29–35,
1995.

Zass, Ron and Shashua, Amnon. Nonnegative sparse pca. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 19, pp.
1561–1568, Cambridge, MA, 2007. MIT Press.

Jolliffe, I.T., Trendafilov, N.T., and Uddin, M. A modified principal component technique based on the lasso. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 12(3):531–547, 2003.

Zhang, Y., d’Aspremont, A., and Ghaoui, L.E. Sparse pca: Convex relaxations, algorithms and applications. Handbook on
Semidefinite, Conic and Polynomial Optimization, pp. 915–
940, 2012.

Karystinos, G.N. and Liavas, A.P. Efficient computation of the
binary vector that maximizes a rank-deficient quadratic form.
Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 56(7):3581–3593,
2010.

Zou, H., Hastie, T., and Tibshirani, R. Sparse principal component
analysis. Journal of computational and graphical statistics, 15
(2):265–286, 2006.

