Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

Adarsh Prasad*
Harsh Pareek*
Pradeep Ravikumar
Department of Computer Science, The University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, USA

Abstract
The rank aggregation problem has been studied
with varying desiderata in varied communities
such as Theoretical Computer Science, Statistics,
Information Retrieval and Social Welfare Theory. We introduce a variant of this problem we
call distributional rank aggregation, where the
ranking data is only available via the induced distribution over the set of all permutations. We provide a novel translation of the usual social welfare theory axioms to this setting. As we show
this allows for a more quantitative characterization of these axioms: which then are not only less
prone to misinterpretation, but also allow simpler proofs for some key impossibility theorems.
Most importantly, these quantitative characterizations lead to natural and novel relaxations of
these axioms, which as we show, allow us to get
around celebrated impossibility results in social
choice theory. We are able to completely characterize the class of positional scoring rules with
respect to our axioms and show that Borda Count
is optimal in a certain sense.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of rank aggregation: a set of agents
provide their ranked preferences over a set of alternatives,
and we wish to aggregate them into a consensus ranking.
Due in part to its generality and importance, this problem
has been studied with varying desiderata in varied communities.
In Theoretical Computer Science, this has been framed as a
combinatorial optimization problem of finding the ranking
that minimizes the average distance (for some appropriate
distance measure such as the Kemeny distance) to the set of
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

ADARSH @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
HARSHP @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU
PRADEEPR @ CS . UTEXAS . EDU

agent rankings. These resulting problems are however typically NP-hard, and research effort has been devoted to developing polynomial time algorithms with approximation
guarantees (Ailon, 2010; Dwork et al., 2001a;b). These can
also be cast as maximizing the average utility (in contrast to
minimizing the average distance); Pivato (2013); Conitzer
& Sandholm (2005) in particular showed that a large class
of existing voting rules could also be interpreted as such
average utility maximizers. Lu & Boutilier (2010) design
a suitable utility measure that in their context captured the
facet of uncertainty about the availability of alternatives.
In the field of Information Retrieval, the problem of rank
aggregation arises as a “meta-algorithm” where for instance we are given the output rankings from multiple
search engines, and we are to combine these into a single ranking (Dwork et al., 2001a;b). Also in this domain,
Cheng et al. (2010) cast the aggregation task in a conditional or supervised setting, where we are given a training
set of (feature-vector, ranking) pairs, and the task is to learn
a map from the feature vector space to the set of permutations.
In Sociometrics, “social welfare theories” by Condorcet
(1785); Arrow (1951) specify normative properties (axioms) that any reasonable rank aggregation should satisfy.
Some results (including the celebrated impossibility theorem of Arrow (1951)) then state that some subsets of axioms cannot be jointly compatible. Several voting rules
such as Condorcet methods, Borda Count, Runoff procedures, etc. have then been suggested, which satisfy different subsets of these axioms.
In Statistics, the agents’ preferences are viewed as i.i.d.
samples from a statistical model and the problem is reformulated to that of learning a distribution over permutations and of computing the Maximum Likelihood Estimate (MLE) of the parameters; the final aggregation returned is then typically just the mode of this distribution.
The focus in this line of work has then been on investigating efficiently learnable models for different types of in* Denotes

equal contribution by the authors

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

puts (Critchlow et al., 1991; Lebanon & Lafferty, 2002a;b;
Hunter, 2004; Lebanon & Mao, 2008; Guiver & Snelson,
2009; Negahban et al., 2012; Soufiani et al., 2013). There
have also been other proposals that go beyond this MLE
based approach. In the social choice domain, where the aim
is to pick a single winner, Young (1988) proposed to select
a winning alternative that is “most likely to be the best (i.e.,
top-ranked in the true ranking)” and provided formulas to
compute it for three alternatives. This idea has been formalized and extended by Procaccia et al. (2012) to choose
a given number of alternatives with highest marginal probability under the Mallows model. In recent work, Soufiani et al. (2014) considered the estimation of the Mallows
model (P (·|W ) ∝ φ`KT (·,W ) ), and outputting a point estimate of the distribution based on statistical decision theoretic considerations. The interesting aspect of this work
was that they then derived constraints on the dispersion parameter φ of the Mallows model for their estimator to satisfy different social-choice theoretic axioms.
We consider rank aggregation from the computer science
and social-welfare theoretic viewpoint: and wish to aggregate an arbitrary set of ranking preferences over a set of
alternatives into a consensus ranking over the entire set of
alternatives. We note that we focus on the more difficult social welfare problem of providing a ranking over the entire
set of alternatives, in contrast to the simpler social choice
problem of outputting only the winner, i.e. the top position,
in the aggregation. In many cases however, we do not have
access to the specific agent or voter identities associated
with a particular preference, as for instance with data from
a secret ballot. Even given access to such voter identities,
the key normative property (i.e. social choice theoretic axiom) of anonymity entails that the consensus ranking not
make use of this information. Accordingly, one might consider a rank aggregation algorithm that has access to (or
makes use of) only the histogram of the ranking preferences, or in other words, the empirical distribution over the
set of all possible rankings as entailed by the given set of
agent ranking preferences. We term this problem as distributional rank aggregation: given any distribution over
the set of all possible rankings over a set of alternatives,
output a consensus ranking, that in effect serves as a pointestimate of this distribution. (We note that this is distinct
from the statistical viewpoint of assuming preferences are
i.i.d. samples from some distribution, and estimating this
distribution.) Such distributional rank aggregation is also
natural when aggregating preferences of a very large population, where we would expect almost all possible rankings
to be present in differing relative proportions, and it would
be natural to collate these preferences into a distribution
over the set of all possible rankings over the set of alternatives.
The first contribution of this paper is in translating the set

of normative axioms studied in the social choice literature
to our distributional ranking setting. As we show, our more
general distributional setting allows to quantitatively characterize these axioms: which addresses a common problem
in social choice practice where the qualitatively stated social choice theoretic axioms are frequently misunderstood
or misinterpreted. This also provides a potential way to understand the relationships between the varied social welfare
axioms. We also provide a counterpart of a classical impossibility theorem stating that it is impossible to satisfy all of
a set of key axioms simultaneously, but where our quantitative characterization of the axioms allows a very simple
proof.
Another key advantage of a quantitative characterization of
the axioms is in potentially relaxing them. In our second
key contribution, we provide precisely such a novel quantitative characterization of approximately satisfiable or relaxed variants of the set of social choice axioms.
In our third key contribution, we leverage these relaxed axiom variants to finesse the celebrated impossibility theorem(s): we show that there exist distributional rank aggregation algorithms that satisfy the relaxed variants of all of
a set of key axioms. We build towards this in the following stages: we first deconstruct the set of normative axioms
and derive an equivalent characterization in terms of certain
margin-like quantities. We then focus on a particular class
of rank aggregation algorithms known as positional scoring
rules, and exhaustively characterize which members of this
class satisfy the set of exact axioms as well as their relaxed
counterparts. As we then show, there exist members of this
family that do satisfy the relaxed variants of all of a set of
key axioms, thus allowing us to finesse a key impossibility
theorem.
Our development leads us to a surprising result: that Borda
Count has the minimum worst-case margin with respect to
approximate satisfiability for certain axioms over all distributions. For specific distributions, our framework also allows us to identify positional losses which can outperform
Borda and we present experiments to this effect.

2. Problem Setup
Consider a set of alternatives or a label set X of size n;
without loss of generality, we will assume this set is X
:= [n] = {1, . . . , n}. A total ordering over the label set is
given by a permutation σ over the set [n], so that σ(x) = j
indicates that the position of label x is j in σ. Let Sn be the
set of all permutations. We also frequently refer to permutations as votes or rankings in this paper. We will refer to
the alternatives or labels with alphabets {x, y}. The alternative x being preferred to y in a permutation σ is equivalent to having σ(x) < σ(y).

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

Consider any distribution P over the set of permutations
Sn . Let the marginal probability
of x being ranked first be
P
denoted by P 1 (x) =
P (σ) and the marginal probσ:σ(x)=1

ability
of x being ranked above y be denoted as Px<y =
P
σ:σ(x)<σ(y) P (σ).
Definition 1. Let Pn denote the set of all distributions
over Sn . We then say that a distributional rank aggregation function is any map σ ∗ : Pn 7→ Sn , that given
any distribution P over Sn outputs a “consensus” ranking
σ ∗ (P ) ∈ Sn .
We note that this differs from the standard rank aggregation
algorithm framework in two subtle respects: (a) the aggregation function takes as input only histogram information
of the set of agent preferences, so that it does not have access to voter identities, and (b) it does not assume a finite
set of voters. Note that an infinite set of voter preferences
can be naturally aggregated into a distribution over the set
of all rankings and provided as input to a distributional rank
aggregation algorithm. Indeed, typical social-choice theoretic settings implicitly assume a very small number of
voters, which in a distributional setting would translate to
a distribution with support limited to a very small subset
of Sn . Another facet of the distributional setting is that
all possible ranking preferences are present, in potentially
differing proportions (as specified by the distribution over
the set of all rankings), so that it also does not assume any
notion of consistency among the voter preferences.
But the key advantage of the distributional rank aggregation
framework is that it allows us to characterize social-choice
theoretic axioms quantitatively in terms of the distribution
P over Sn . In the following sections, we first review standard social-choice theoretic axioms which specify normative properties that any rank aggregation algorithm should
satisfy, and extend these to our distributional rank aggregation setting.

3. Axiomatic Analysis
Social choice/welfare theory was put on an axiomatic foundation by Arrow (1951) who stated the following axioms
that a voting (rank aggregation) procedure should satisfy:
(S1) Non-dictatorship: The social welfare function
should account for the wishes of multiple voters. It
cannot simply mimic the preferences of a single voter.
(S2) Universality: For any set of individual voter preferences, the social welfare function should yield a
unique, deterministic and complete ranking of societal
choices.
(S3) Transitivity: The final aggregation should be strictly
transitive i.e. if alternative x is preferred over y, y is

preferred over z then x should also be preferred over
z.
(S4) Pareto-efficiency: For every pair x and y of alternatives, If everyone prefers x to y, then x is preferred to
y in the resulting social preference order.
(S5) Independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA): The
social preference between x and y should depend only
on the individual preferences between x and y. i.e. if
one or more voters change their preferences, but no
one changes their relative positions of x and y, then
the relative positions of x and y in the aggregation
should still remain the same.
Arrow (1951) proves Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem,i.e.
when then the number of alternatives is strictly greater
than 2, then no function exists which satisfies the above
stated axioms and thus, these axioms are inconsistent. Brief
proofs of Arrow’s theorem are presented in Geanakoplos
(2005).
In addition to Arrow’s axioms, some other axioms are
also well-established in the Social Welfare Theory literature (Soufiani et al., 2014):
(S6) Anonymity: The social welfare procedure is insensitive to permutations over voters.
(S7) Monotonicity: For any alternative, say x, if one of
the voters moves the position of x up in his list, the
position of x can only improve in the aggregation.
0

(S8) Consistency: Let S = {σ1 , σ2 , . . . , σn } and S =
0
0
0
{σ1 , σ2 , . . . , σn } be two sets of voters/permutations
such that the aggregation procedure assigns the same
alternative to the top position in each, then when the
input is Ŝ = {S ∪ S 0 }, the winner should remain the
same.
(S9) Majority rule: For any set of voters, if an alternative
x is ranked in the top position in strictly more than
half the votes, then in the final aggregation, x should
be ranked at the highest position.
(S10) Condorcet Criterion: If there exists an alternative
say x, such that for every other alternative y, x is preferred over y, by strictly more than half of the voters,
then x should be ranked at the highest position in the
aggregation.
3.1. Translating Axioms to the Distributional Rank
Aggregation Framework
We consider a distributional view of the rank aggregation
problem where the individual rankings cannot be accessed

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

directly and are available only through a distribution, i.e. a
histogram, over the permutations.
It is unclear what the social-choice theoretic axioms above
imply in such a setting. Further, we would prefer more
quantitative characterizations of these axioms, and perhaps
even axioms whose preconditions involve quantitative conditions. In this section, we thus discuss a translation of each
of the axioms above Section 3 to the distributional setting.
For any distribution P over Sn , we specify the axioms
below for a general distributional rank aggregation map
σ ∗ (P ), and for which we use the shorthand σP∗ .
(D1) Non-dictatorship: To be a dictatorship, a social welfare function must be able to identify the votes of individual voters (and subsequently follow the vote of
the dictator). In the distributional framework, we only
observe the aggregate distribution over Sn and hence
cannot determine the vote of any individual voter.
Thus, the non-dictatorship condition is always satisfied by the distributional framework.
σP∗

ings, this shifts probability mass between certain permutations where the position of x goes up while that
of other alternatives goes down or remains the same.
Let σ1 and σ2 ∈ Sn such that σ2 (x) < σ1 (x) and
σ2 (y) ≥ σ1 (y)∀y ∈ X \{x}. Then, we can translate the monotonicity condition as: Given two distributions P and Q s.t. P (σ2 ) = Q(σ2 ) + δ, P (σ1 ) =
Q(σ1 ) − δ, δ > 0 and P (σ) = Q(σ) for σ 6= σ1 , σ2
∗
then, monotonicity is satisfied iff σP∗ (x) ≤ σQ
(x).
(D8) Consistency: Consistency requires that if an alternative wins in two separate sets of votes, it should also
win in the (multiset) union of those sets. For distributions the union of the sets is given as (P + Q)/2 and
we have the condition: Given two distributions P and
∗
Q such that σP∗ (x) = 1, σQ
(x) = 1, then consistency
∗
is satisfied iff σ P +Q (x) = 1.
2

(D9) Majority rule: If an alternative x ranks at top of
strictly greater thanP
half of the votes, then x must win.
Let P 1 (x) =
P (σ) measure the marginal
σ:σ(x)=1

probability of x being ranked first. Then, majority rule
is satisfied iff P 1 (x) > 12 ⇒ σP∗ (x) = 1

(D2) Universality: Since
∈ Sn , the output of our ranking procedure is always a complete ranking. Universality then requires that the output of the aggregation (D10) Condorcet Criterion: Given a distribution P such
that if Px<y > 12 ∀ y ∈ X \{x} then the Condorcet
procedure should be unique.
criterion is satisfied iff σP∗ (x) = 1. Observe that, if
(D3) Transitivity: Since σP∗ ∈ Sn , transitivity is automatithe Condorcet criterion is satisfied, then Majority rule
cally satisfied.
is also satisfied.
(D4) Pareto-efficiency: The Pareto-efficiency condition
can be translated as, for all permutations in the support of P , if alternative x is ranked above y, then x
should be ranked above y in the aggregation i.e. if
∀σ : P (σ) > 0; σ(x) < σ(y), then Pareto-efficiency
is satisfied iff σP∗ (x) < σP∗ (y).
(D5) Independence of irrelevant alternatives (IIA): If
voters change their preferences in a way that preserves the relative positions of x and y in each vote,
the marginal probability of x being
P preferred over y
remains constant. Let Px<y =
σ:σ(x)<σ(y) P (σ)
be the marginal probability of x being preferred over
y. Then, the IIA condition can be translated as:
∀x, y ∈ X , given any two distributions P and Q
such that Px<y = Qx<y , then
 ∗IIA is satisfied
 iff
∗
sign [σP∗ (x) − σP∗ (y)] = sign σQ
(x) − σQ
(y) .
(D6) Anonymity: As in the non-dictatorship condition, we
only have access to the votes through the distribution and thus cannot identify individual voters and
anonymity is implicitly satisfied in the distributional
framework.
(D7) Monotonicity: If one or more voters improves the
position of an alternative x in their respective rank-

This translation is a novel contribution of this paper. The
following theorem, which follows from the above discussion, summarizes the equivalence of these axioms to those
from social welfare theory:
Theorem 1 (Equivalence of axioms). If voting data is accessible only via its distribution over Sn , the Social Welfare
Axioms (S1-S10) are equivalent to the axioms (D1-D10) introduced above.
Since non-dictatorship and transitivity are implicit in the
distributional framework, Arrow’s Impossibility Theorem
states that a procedure cannot satisfy Universality, Pareto
and IIA simultaneously. However, the quantitative nature
of these axioms suggests that they can be relaxed and we
will do so in the next section.
3.2. Relaxations of Social Welfare Axioms
We see that in the distributional setting, most axioms can be
interpreted in terms of marginals of the distribution P , and
represent constraints on σP∗ based on these marginals. This
probabilistic interpretation of the axioms motivates us to
account for noise in the observed rankings by introducing
a margin-like notion and go beyond impossibility results.

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

Consider for example, IIA. Let Mγ (x, y) = {P |Px<y =
γ} be the family of distributions with marginal probability
γ for σ(x) < σ(y), then IIA is satisfied, if for all 0 ≤ γ ≤
1, and distributions Q1 , Q2 ∈ Mγ (x, y),
 ∗

 ∗

∗
∗
sign σQ
(x) − σQ
(y) = sign σQ
(x) − σQ
(y)
1
1
2
2
(1)
i.e. moving probability mass such that the marginals remain
the same does not alter the relationship between x and y in
the aggregation.

3.3. Comparative Analysis of Axioms

Intuitively, the hardest case for IIA is when γ = 21 , as it is
unclear which of x and y should be preferred based on the
marginal probability. However, as γ moves away from 21 ,
a decision between x and y can be made more easily. This
intuition motivates the definition below, where we require
IIA to hold only for such distributions where the distinction
between x and y can be made more easily:

While the previous sections provided a quantitative characterization of social-choice theoretic axioms, as well as
suitable relaxations of these, one might ask if there were
commonalities between these different axioms. In this section, we investigate this question further. Before doing so,
we first obtain a optimization based characterization of any
distributional rank aggregation procedure.

Definition 2. -IIA is satisfied, iff for all Q1 , Q2 ∈
1
{P |Px<y = γ}, where
 |γ − 2 | ∗ ≥ ,  ∗> 0, then
∗
∗
sign σQ1 (x) − σQ1 (y) = sign σQ2 (x) − σQ2 (y) .

Consider the following class of distributional rank aggregation procedures:

note that this may not always be desirable, due to the following proposition:
Proposition 1. For  < 1/6, -Strong Condorcet is incompatible with universality.
We also have:
Proposition 2. -Strong Condorcet ⇒ -IIA.

σP∗ = argmin g(σ, P )

Similarly, the Majority Rule axiom can be parameterized
in terms of marginal probabilityPof an alternative x being
ranked at the top, P 1 (x) =
P (σ) = γ . As this
σ:σ(x)=1

marginal probability goes to 1, a reasonable rank aggregation procedure would place x at the top. This intuition
motivates the following definition:
Definition 3. The -Majority Rule axiom is satisfied, iff for
all P : P 1 (x) ≥ 12 +  ;  > 0, σP∗ (x) = 1.
The Condorcet Criterion also allows for a similar extension:
Definition 4. -Condorcet Rule is satisfied, if for all P :
Px<y ≥ 21 +  ;  > 0 ∀ y ∈ X\{x}, σP∗ (x) = 1.
While it is also possible to relax the other axioms in a similar manner, it is not as natural; for instance, we expect
Pareto to always be satisfied for any reasonable rank aggregation procedure. In addition, as we will see in Section 4,
the above relaxations are sufficient to ensure that a ranking
procedure satisfying all our axioms exist.
Note that the Condorcet criterion is stronger than Pareto
in that Condorcet implies Pareto. It is also possible to
strengthen the Condorcet criterion further by dropping the
∀y requirement. We call this the -Strong Condorcet criterion:
Definition 5. -Strong Condorcet Rule is satisfied, if for all
P : Px<y ≥ 21 +  ;  > 0, then σP∗ (x) < σP∗ (y).
Thus, if x is ranked above y in a significant fraction of the
votes, x should be ranked above y in the aggregation. We

(2)

σ∈Sn

Note that  = 0 corresponds to the usual IIA.

where g : Sn × Pn 7→ R, and Pn is the set of all distributions on Sn . This characterization is WLOG as:
Proposition 3. Any distributional rank aggregation procedure can be expressed in the form (2) for some function g.
We now define two quantities for any pair of alternatives x
and y based on g and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1.



gP (σ)
P :Px<y =γ σ:σ(x)<σ(y)
σ:σ(x)>σ(y)


Uγ (g; x, y) = max
min
gP (σ) −
min
gP (σ)

Lγ (g; x, y) =

min

min

P :Px<y =γ

σ:σ(x)<σ(y)

gP (σ) −

min

σ:σ(x)>σ(y)

Thus, Lγ (g; x, y) and Uγ (g; x, y) are the lower and upper
bounds for the quantity in brackets. We now show how
most of the axioms can be re-written in terms of these two
quantities.
Proposition 4. g satisfies Pareto-efficiency
Uγ (g; x, y) < 0, ∀ x, y ∈ X for γ = 1

iff

Proposition 5. g satisfies IIA iff Lγ (g; x, y), Uγ (g; x, y) >
0, ∀γ : 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1 and ∀ x, y ∈ X ,
Proposition 6. g satisfies the Condorcet criterion iff
Uγ (g; x, y) < 0, for 12 < γ ≤ 1, ∀ x, y ∈ X .
We define another quantity for any alternative x based on g
and 0 ≤ γ ≤ 1


1
Uγ (g; x) = max
min gP (σ) − min gP (σ)
1
P :P (x)=γ

σ:σ(x)=1

σ:σ(x)6=1

Proposition 7. g satisfies Majority Rule iff Uγ1 (g; x) < 0,
for all 12 < γ ≤ 1, ∀ x ∈ X .

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

Similar conditions can be obtained for the relaxed definitions of axioms discussed before. Consistency and monotonicity both depend on the structure of g in ways that
we believe cannot be captured as easily by the quantities
Lγ (g; x, y) and Uγ (g; x, y) and we leave these for future
work.
3.4. An Impossibility Theorem for Distributional Rank
Aggregation
We now present an impossibility theorem regarding the
ability of any distributional rank aggregation procedure
to satisfy both Universality and Pareto axioms simultaneously. Recall that Arrow’s impossibility theorem in our
setting states that no procedure satisfies Pareto, IIA and
Universality. This result then provides an alternative intuitive proof of Arrow’ theorem for the special case of g
continuous in P .
Theorem 2. For n ≥ 2, if g(σ, P ) in (2) is a continuous
function of P for each fixed σ, both Universality and Pareto
cannot be satisfied simultaneously.
The continuity property is desirable for computational purposes and procedures used in practice for rank aggregation
use a continuous g. Since Pareto is an important condition
that we do not wish to relax, the above result implies that
we must abandon the universality assumption, i.e. we must
be content with procedures that sometimes return multiple
aggregations.
Regarding Arrow’s impossibility theorem for general g, we
first note that the usual proofs of Arrow’s theorem which
rely on identifying pivotal voters fail completely in this
framework. In fact, Fishburn (1970) gives a possibility result in the case of infinite voters, which our framework captures. However, the proof there is not constructive and the
g involved will quite likely be pathological — it will certainly not be continuous in P . We hope to investigate this
further in future work.

4. Positional Scoring Losses
The impossibility theorems derived in the previous section
state that there are no distributional rank aggregation procedures that simultaneously satisfy a set of key axioms. But
would the impossibility theorem continue to hold if we only
need satisfy our relaxed variants of the exact axioms? We
can ask a more general and more difficult question: for each
axiom, and its relaxed variant, can we exhaustively characterize which rank aggregation procedures would satisfy or
not satisfy these?
We consider a simplification of the above general question,
and ask for such an exhaustive characterization for a simpler family of rank aggregation procedures known as posi-

tional scoring rules (Kenneth J. Arrow & Suzumura, 2002,
Chapter 7).
Recall from Section 3.3 that any distributional rank aggregation function can be expressed in the form in (2) as the
the minimizer of some loss functional g(σ, P ). Let us first
consider the following specialization of these loss functionals that are commonly used in varied computer scientific domains. Specifically, for any bivariate loss function
` : Sn × Sn 7→ R that measures the discrepancy between
two rankings, consider the loss functional g(σ, P ) set to the
expected value of ` over P . We then obtain the following
rank aggregation procedure:
∗
σ`,P
= argmin g(σ, P ) = argmin Eσ0 ∼P [`(σ, σ 0 )] (3)
σ∈Sn

σ∈Sn

In general, `(σ 0 , σ) can be any bivariate function but the
following are of special interest:
• `0−1 (σ, σ 0 ) = 1[σ 6= σ 0 ]: This corresponds to the zeroone distance between permutations. The corresponding
σ`∗0−1 ,P is then the mode of the distribution P . Statistical and machine learning approaches to the rank aggregation problem fit a (unimodal) distribution to the P
and then return the mode of the estimated distribution
as a point estimate. Thus, these techniques implicitly
use the zero-one loss.
• `KT (σ, σ 0 )

P

=

1[sign(σ(x) − σ(y))

6=

(x,y)∈[n]

sign(σ 0 (x) − σ 0 (y))]: This loss measures the Kendall-

Tau distance between two permutations, i.e. the
number of inversions between them. The minimization
problem for this loss has been shown to be NP-hard
and this loss has been studied widely in the Theoretical
Computer Science literature.
P
• `(σ, σ 0 ) =
|σ(x) − σ 0 (x)|: This loss measures the
x∈[n]

Spearman-footrule distance and is used as an approximation to the Kendall-Tau.
Positional scoring methods assign a score to each alternative in a permutation based on its position, these scores are
aggregated across permutations and the final aggregation is
obtained by sorting the alternatives based on their cumulative scores. Equivalently,
Definition 6 (Positional Scoring Loss). A loss `h is a Positional
Loss iff it can be decomposed as `h (σ, σ 0 ) =
P Scoring
0
h(σ (x)).σ(x), where h : [n] 7→ R
x
∗
Using Equation (3), the corresponding σP,`
can be written
h
as:
∗
σP,`
= argmin Eσ0 ∼P [`h (σ, σ 0 )]
h
σ∈Sn

= argmin
σ∈Sn

X
x

Eσ0 ∼P [h(σ 0 (x))].σ(x)

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

Name

h : [n] 7→ R

Ωh

ωh

ωh1

 for IIA/Cond.

 for Maj.

Borda Count
Plurality Rule
Anti-Plurality Rule
Log Rule

h(i) = n − i
h(i) = 1 if i = 1, 0 else
h(n) = 0; h(i) = 1 ∀i 6= n
h(i) = − log(i)

n−1
1
1
log(n)

1
0
0
n
log( n−1
)

1
1
0
log(2)

1/2 − 1/n
1/2
1/2

1/2 − 1/n
0
1/2

Squared Rule

h(i) = −i2

n2 − 1

3

3

log(n)
2 log(n2 /(n−1))
2
n −4
2(n2 +2)

log(n)
2 log(n2 /(n−1))
2
n −4
2(n2 +2)

Table 1. Different Positional Scoring Rules and their key properties

X

(4)

Proposition 10 (−IIA).
scoring loss `h sat A positional

1 Ωh −ωh
isfies −IIA iff  > 2 Ωh +ωh .

where fP : X 7→ R is given by fP (x) = Eσ0 ∼P [h(σ 0 (x))]
is the cumulative scoring function.

Proposition 11 (Pareto Efficiency). A positional scoring
loss `h satisfies Pareto-efficiency exactly iff h : [n] 7→ R is
strictly monotonically decreasing.
Proposition 12 (Monotonicity). A positional scoring loss
`h satisfies Monotonicity iff h : [n] 7→ R is non-increasing.
Proposition 13 (Consistency). Every positional loss function `h satisfies consistency.
Proposition 14 (Majority rule). A positional scoring loss
`h satisfies Majority rule iff max(Ωh , −ωh ) − ωh1 = 0 and
ωh1 + max(Ωh , −ωh ) > 0
Proposition 15 (-Majority rule). A positional
scoring loss


max(Ω ,−ω )−ω 1
`h satisfies −Majority Rule iff  > 21 max(Ωhh ,−ωhh )+ωh1 .

= argmin
σ∈Sn

fP (x).σ(x)

x

Proposition 8. Given fP (x) = Eσ0 ∼P [h(σ 0 (x))], then
∗
σP,`
is the permutation achieved by sorting the alternah
tives in descending order of fP (x)
This proposition also shows that the rank aggregation using
Positional Scoring rules can be computed efficiently. Table 1 give examples of some well-known positional scoring rules, their corresponding h-functions, and their keyproperties.
4.1. Axiomatic Analysis of Positional Scoring Rules
Non-dictatorship, Transitivity and Anonymity are implicit
in the distributional framework. Positional scoring rules
are continuous in P , so Theorem 2 applies and we will not
require Universality.
We define three properties of interest for any positional loss
function. These quantities play a key role in establishing
several axioms:
• Ωh =

max

{i,j∈[n]|i<j}

h(i) − h(j).

This is the maximum variation in possible scores for h.
• ωh =

min

{i,j∈[n]|i<j}

h(i) − h(j)

This is the minimum variation in possible scores for h.
• ωh1 =

min

h(1) − h(j)

j∈[n]|j>1

This is the minimum variation in possible scores for h
with respect to the first position. This is used in analyzing the Majority Rule.
We observe the following:
• For n = 2, Ωh = ωh = ωh1 .
• For n > 3, Ωh ≥ ωh with equality holding iff h :
[n] 7→ R is a constant function.
Proposition 9 (IIA). No positional scoring loss `h satisfies
IIA exactly.

h

Proposition 16 (Condorcet Criterion). No positional scoring loss `h satisfies the Condorcet Criterion
Proposition 17 (−Strong Condorcet Criterion). A positional scoring loss
the −Strong Condorcet Cri `h satisfies

1 Ωh −ωh
terion iff  > 2 Ωh +ωh
Recall from Proposition 2, that -Strong Condorcet implies
-IIA, consistent with propositions 10 and 17. Thus, we
have the same  for both IIA and Condorcet for positional
loss functions and they are shown together in Table 1.
4.2. A Possibility Theorem with Relaxed Axioms
Given the theory above, we can now quantify the extent to
which a given positional loss satisfies each of the approximate axioms. A natural first question is whether any loss
satisfies our relaxed axioms.
Theorem 3. The set of positional loss functions which admits the following axioms is non-empty: exact versions of
Pareto and Monotonicity, relaxed axioms -IIA, -Strong
Condorcet, 0 -Majority Rule
A second question is whether we can design losses that satisfy the approximate axioms to the greatest extent possible.
The following theorems show a surprising result, that the
Borda Count is the optimal positional ranking function in a
certain sense.

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis
1

1

Plurality
Log
Borda
Squared
AntiPlurality

0.6

0.8
Prob. of Success

Prob. of Success

0.8

0.4
0.2

Plurality
Log
Borda
Squared
AntiPlurality

0.6
0.4
0.2

0
0.5

0.6

0.7
0.8
Weight on Center 1

0.9

1

(a) Experiment 1

0
0.5

0.6

0.7
0.8
Weight on Center 1

0.9

1

(b) Experiment 2

Figure 1. Performance of different positional scoring rules on the mixture of Mallows’ models

Lemma 1. For any positional scoring loss `h that satisfies
h
Pareto, Ω
ωh ≥ n − 1, where n is the number of alternatives.

list and thus pay more attention to relative positions at the
bottom. See Table 1 for details on the losses.

Theorem 4. For any fixed n, Borda count is optimal w.r.t.
the -Strong Condorcet condition and -IIA, i.e. has the
least  among all positional loss functions.

Let {A, B, C, D, E} be the set of alternatives X , n = 5. A
Mallows model is given by P (·|W ) ∝ φ`KT (·,W ) , where
W is the central permutation, φ ∈ (0, 1] is the dispersion parameter and `KT is the Kendall-Tau distance. A
higher φ makes the distribution more concentrated around
the central permutation. We use a mixture of two Mallows
models for our experiments. Let Z1 and Z2 be the two
central permutations and w and 1 − w be their weights
in the mixture. We perform two experiments. In Experiment 1, we fix centers Z1 = {D, E, A, B, C} and
Z2 = {B, C, D, E, A}, while in Experiment 2 we fix centers Z1 = {A, B, C, D, E} and Z2 = {B, C, D, E, A}.
Then, for φ = 0.8, we vary w from 0.51 to 1.0. Thus,
in both experiments, we put higher weight on Z1 having
σ(A) < σ(B) and as we increase the weight, we are effectively increasing Px<y . For a given w, we generate samples
from the mixture of Mallows model and aggregate them using the positional scoring rules.

This fact seems to have been noted previously in the literature. Saari (1990) states “the Borda method is the unique
positionalist method to minimize the kinds and number of
paradoxes that can occur”. However, the justification given
in (Saari, 1990) uses the much more complex machinery
that our relaxation-based approach.

5. Experiments
Theroem 4 showed that Borda Count is optimal in a “worstcase” sense in satisfying certain relaxed axioms. However,
this does not mean that it dominates all other positional
losses over all distributions and we present experiments to
demonstrate this fact. Our framework shows that the key
quantities to take into account when designing a positional
loss are Ωh and ωh . For a non-increasing h, h can be scaled
so that Ωh is fixed. Then ωh , intuitively the smallest (discrete) gradient of h, is the key quantity to compare among
losses. A key factor in the following discussion will be
the position in the list where this minimum value ωh is
achieved. Our discussion will be terse for lack of space
and we discuss the results in detail in Appendix B.
Setup. We consider the following losses: Borda count
where h is linear, a “Convex” loss log, a “concave” loss
Square and the limiting convex and concave losses Plurality and AntiPlurality. The convex losses achieve minimum
ωh = h(n) − h(n − 1) at the bottom of the list and thus pay
more attention to relative positions at the top. The concave
losses achieve minimum ωh = h(1) − h(2) at the top of the

Metric. We call an aggregation a “success” if it ranks A
above B. We perform multiple trials for each w to calculate
the probability of success.
Results. Figure 1 shows the probability of success
against the weight value w for both experiments. As expected, there is an inverse relationships between the two
plots w.r.t. the order of the best performing methods.

Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the support of ARO via W911NF-121-0390 and NSF via IIS-1149803, IIS-1320894, IIS1447574, and DMS-1264033.

Distributional Rank Aggregation, and an Axiomatic Analysis

References
Ailon, Nir. Aggregation of Partial Rankings, p-Ratings and
Top-m Lists. Algorithmica, 57(2):284–300, 2010.

Lu, Tyler and Boutilier, Craig E. The unavailable candidate
model: a decision-theoretic view of social choice. In
ACM conference on Electronic Commerce, 2010.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. Social choice and individual values. Wiley, New York., 1951.

Negahban, S., Oh, S., and Shah, D. Iterative Ranking from
Pair-wise Comparisons. Arxiv, abs/1209.1688, 2012.
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1209.1688.

Cheng, W., Hüllermeier, E., and Dembczynski, K. J. Label ranking methods based on the Plackett-Luce model.
In Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML-10), pp. 215–222, 2010.

Pivato, Marcus. Voting rules as statistical estimators. Social Choice and Welfare, 40(2), 2013.

Condorcet, M de. Essay on the Application of Analysis to
the Probability of Majority Decisions. Paris: Imprimerie
Royale, 1785.

Procaccia, Ariel D., Reddi, Sashank Jakkam, and
Shah, Nisarg.
A Maximum Likelihood Approach
For Selecting Sets of Alternatives. In UAI, 2012.
URL http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/
uai/uai2012.html#ProcacciaRS12.

Conitzer, Vincent and Sandholm, Tuomas. Common Voting Rules as Maximum Likelihood Estimators. In UAI,
2005.

Saari, Donald G. The borda dictionary. Social Choice and
Welfare, 7(4):279–317, 1990.

Critchlow, Douglas E, Fligner, Michael A, and Verducci,
Joseph S. Probability models on rankings. Journal of
mathematical psychology, 35(3):294–318, 1991.

Soufiani, Hossein Azari, Chen, William, Parkes, David C,
and Xia, Lirong. Generalized method-of-moments for
rank aggregation. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 2706–2714, 2013.

Dwork, C., Kumar, R., Naor, M., and Sivakumar, D. Rank
aggregation methods for the web. In 10th international
conference on World Wide Web, pp. 613–622, 2001a.
Dwork, C., Kumar, R., Naor, M., and Sivakumar, D. Rank
aggregation revisited, 2001b.
Fishburn, Peter C. Arrow’s impossibility theorem: Concise
proof and infinite voters. Journal of Economic Theory, 2
(1):103–106, 1970.
Geanakoplos, John. Three brief proofs of Arrow’s impossibility theorem. Economic Theory, 2005.
Guiver, J. and Snelson, E. Bayesian inference for PlackettLuce ranking models. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, pp.
377–384, 2009.
Hunter, D. R. MM algorithms for generalized BradleyTerry models. Annals of Statistics, pp. 384–406, 2004.
Kenneth J. Arrow, Amartya K. Sen and Suzumura, Kotaro.
Handbook of Social Choice and Welfare, volume 1. Elsevier, 2002.
Lebanon, G. and Lafferty, J. D. Cranking: Combining
Rankings Using Conditional Probability Models on Permutations. In ICML, pp. 363–370, 2002a.
Lebanon, G. and Lafferty, J. D. Conditional Models on the
Ranking Poset. In NIPS, pp. 415–422, 2002b.
Lebanon, G. and Mao, Y. Non-Parametric Modeling of
Partially Ranked Data. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 9:2401–2429, 2008.

Soufiani, Hossein Azari, Parkes, David C, and Xia, Lirong.
A Statistical Decision-Theoretic Framework for Social
Choice. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pp. 3185–3193, 2014.
Young, H Peyton. Condorcet’s theory of voting. American
Political Science Review, 1988.

