Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

Uri Heinemann
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

URIHEI @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

Amir Globerson
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

GAMIR @ CS . HUJI . AC . IL

Abstract
Unsupervised learning of graphical models is
an important task in many domains. Although
maximum likelihood learning is computationally hard, there do exist consistent learning algorithms (e.g., psuedo-likelihood and its variants).
However, inference in the learned models is still
hard, and thus they are not directly usable. In
other words, given a probabilistic query they are
not guaranteed to provide an answer that is close
to the true one.
In the current paper, we provide a learning algorithm that is guaranteed to provide approximately correct probabilistic inference. We focus on a particular class of models, namely high
girth graphs in the correlation decay regime. It is
well known that approximate inference (e.g, using loopy BP) in such models yields marginals
that are close to the true ones. Motivated by
this, we propose an algorithm that always returns
models of this type, and hence in the models it
returns inference is approximately correct. We
derive finite sample results guaranteeing that beyond a certain sample size, the resulting models will answer probabilistic queries with a high
level of accuracy.
Results on synthetic data show that the models
we learn indeed outperform those obtained by
other algorithms, which do not return high girth
graphs.

1. Introduction
Graphical models are a highly useful tool for describing multivariate distributions (Koller and Friedman, 2009).
Proceedings of the 31 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Beijing, China, 2014. JMLR: W&CP volume 32. Copyright 2014 by the author(s).

Such models assume that the distribution can be written as
a product of functions, each defined over a small set of parameters. When these functions are pairwise, the structure
of the model can be described via the edges of a graph.
To fully describe a graphical model , one must specify both
its structure and parameters. In principle, once these are
available, one can answer probabilistic queries such as:
“what is the probability that X1 = 0 given that X5 =
0, X6 = 0”. Indeed the power of graphical models lies
in their ability to answer any such probabilistic inference
query. Unfortunately, for most models of interest these inference queries are computationally intractable (e.g., #P
hard). The common approach to this state of affairs is to either use approximate inference algorithms (e.g., sampling,
loopy belief propagation, mean field) or to focus on families where inference is tractable or can be well approximated (e.g., low tree width graph, or high girth graphs as
we focus on here).
The situation is further complicated by the fact that in most
cases the graph structure and parameters are not known a
priori, and need to be learned from data. Ideally, we would
like inference in the learned model to agree with inference
in the true underlying distribution. In other words, if the
true model is p∗ (x) we would like the learned model to
answer the probabilistic query P [X1 = 0|X5 = 0, X6 = 0]
with a number that is close to p∗ (x1 = 0|x5 = 0, x6 = 0).1
If inference in the learned model cannot be performed exactly, one needs to consider the interplay between learning
and inference, which has recently been referred to as “Inferning”.2
The above goal of making accurate inferences in the
learned model is quite ambitious, and is indeed not
achieved by most current learning methods, including ones
which have otherwise strong theoretical guarantees. For
example the psueodlikelihood method for parameter estimation (Besag, 1975) and various recent methods for struc1
We slightly abuse notation of the PMF by not including indices indicating which conditional distribution is considered.
2
See: http://inferning.cs.umass.edu/2012.

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

ture learning (Ravikumar et al., 2010; Jalali et al., 2011) are
known to be consistent (i.e., they recover correct structure
and parameters as n → ∞). However, inference in the
models they learn is generally intractable, and thus there is
no reason to expect that it will come close to inference in
p∗ (x).3
One way to make progress towards our goal is to assume
that p∗ (x) has structure and parameters that facilitate exact
or approximately correct inference. In this setting it makes
sense to expect that the learned model will inherit these
properties (at least asymptotically) and thus yield inference
that is close to p∗ (x). Perhaps the most elegant illustration
of this approach is the celebrated Chow Liu (CL) algorithm
(Chow and Liu, 1968) which learns a tree structured graphical model. CL can also be shown to be consistent for both
parameter and structure learning (Tan et al., 2011). Since
inference in trees is tractable, inference in the learned tree
models will approach that of the true model.
However, CL is limited in that it can only use tree structured models, and these are often not sufficient for describing complex dependencies that arise in real data. The next
natural step is to look for model classes where inference is
not tractable, but approximate inference with approximation bounds is possible. Here we focus on such a class,
namely, models with high girth and correlation decay (or
HGCD). These models are “tree-like” in the sense of having long cycles, but they exhibit much richer properties.
For example, in LDPC codes, high girth structures can be
used to approach capacity (Richardson et al., 2001). An
attractive property of HGCD is that inference, despite being intractable, can be  approximated (with  depending
on the HGCD structure and parameters) using loopy belief
propagation (Mezard and Montanari, 2009).
Given the above, there is clear motivation for learning a
graphical model that is a HGCD. It is important to emphasize that our goal is not to asymptotically learn such
a model, but to return such a model for any given finite
sample. This will guarantee that inference in our learned
HGCD is  approximate. In turn, it will let us show that
if the true distribution p∗ (x) is an HGCD, then inference
in the learned model will be O() close to p∗ (x) given a
sufficiently large but finite training sample.
Our contribution is thus as follows: we describe an algorithm that takes as input a sample generated by an HGCD
p∗ with graph G. The algorithm returns another HGCD
with graph Ḡ, which has the following desirable properties
as n → ∞: it is guaranteed (whp) to include the edges of
3

We note that many methods learn models that match certain
marginals of the empirical data (corresponding to edges of the
graph), and are thus guaranteed to accurately recover this small
set of marginals. However no guarantees are available for other
probabilistic queries. See for example (Wainwright, 2006).

G, it is guaranteed to achieve test likelihood that is close
to the best possible, and, most importantly, inference in the
learned model is guaranteed to be close to inference in p∗ .
The algorithm we propose is very simple, and generalizes
Chow Liu in a very natural way. It proceeds as follows: for
every pair of variables (i, j) set wi,j to be the empirical mutual information between these variables. Now construct G
by greedily adding the edges with the highest weight, as
long as G has the required girth. After having learned the
model structure, we set the parameters in a similar way to
CL, while ensuring they are in the HGCD regime.
After describing the algorithm and proving its properties,
we illustrate its performance on synthetic data. We show
that it indeed performs more accurate predictions than
models that are not restricted to high girth.

2. Problem Formulation
Graphical models are used to compactly describe multivariate distributions over p random variables X1 , . . . , Xp (e.g.,
see Koller and Friedman, 2009). We use x = (x1 , . . . , xp )
to denote an assignment to the p variables. The model
(G, θ) is parameterized via a set of edges E, and functions
θij (xi , xj ) for each ij ∈ E. The distribution is given by:
p(x; θ) =

1 Pij∈E θij (xi ,xj )+Pi θi (xi )
e
Z(θ)

(2.1)

where Z(θ) is the partition function that normalizes the
distribution.
To simplify presentation and analysis we focus on the case
where Xi ∈ {−1, +1} are binary variables. In this case we
obtain the Ising model, which can be parameterized in the
following way (here Jij , hi are scalars):
p(x; θ) =

1 Pij∈E Jij xi xj +Pi hi xi
e
Z(θ)

Thus for the Ising model we have:



−hi
Jij
θi (xi ) =
, θij (xi , xj ) =
hi
−Jij

(2.2)


−Jij
Jij
(2.3)

Given a sample D = x(1) , . . . , x(n) of n assignments sampled IID from the true distribution p∗ (x), we wish to approximate p∗ with a graphical model. The classic approach
to learning parametric models from data is by maximizing
the likelihood, which in our case would be
n

L(θ, E) =

1X
log p(x(i) ; θ)
n i=1

(2.4)

where it is implied that θ is restricted to the edges E. For
general models, this function is hard to optimize and even

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

evaluate (since it requires the evaluation of the log partition function). Note that what we would actually like to
maximize is the generalization likelihood, namely the expected likelihood according to the true distribution (e.g.,
see Dudı́k et al., 2007):
X
L∗ (θ, E) =
p∗ (x) log p(x; θ)
(2.5)

learns a structure E and then assigns parameters θ, as explained next.

However, since we don’t know p∗ this cannot be maximized directly. One option is to instead maximize the empirical likelihood Eq. 2.4. However this is often computationally hard, and other methods such as pseudo likelihood
may be used. The method presented here also does not
maximize the empirical likelihood directly, but is still consistent.

The structure learning part is a simple extension of CL to
graphs with bounded girth. The first stage is to calculate
the weights wij as in Eq. 2.8. Next, the learned E is constructed by greedily adding the edges with largest wij , as
long as the graph has girth lower bounded by g. The procedure is described in Figure 1. Note that if g = p + 1, it
reduces to standard CL, but otherwise it is different from
CL since it does not return a tree. Computationally, ECL
requires keeping track of paths in the graph, such that generation of a cycle shorter than g can be efficiently identified. By using standard graph search algorithms, this can
be implemented in O(p3 ).4

If E is restricted to tree graphs, then the likelihood in
Eq. 2.4 can be exactly maximized using the Chow Liu algorithm. CL uses two simple facts. The first is that for any
tree E, the optimal values of θ are given by the so called
canonical parameters:

Once the structure E has been determined, we turn to setting the parameters θ. If there is no constraint on the interaction strength we set θ = θ c for the edges in Ē, as in
Eq. 2.6. In other words, the parameters are set exactly as in
the Chow Liu algorithm.

µij (xi , xj )
µi (xi )µj (xj )
(2.6)
where µi , µij are the singleton and pairwise marginals calculated from the data. We will denote the set of all canonical parameters by θ c or θ c (µ) to highlight their dependence
on the marginals µ. Second, for these parameters the likelihood turns out to be:
X
X
L(θ c , E) =
ID (Xi ; Xj ) +
HD (Xi )
(2.7)

In some cases we may want to further constrain the parameters, so that interaction strength is bounded, and we are in
the correlation decay regime. This is addressed in Section
6. However, note that most of our theoretical results for
learning parameters and structure hold even if we do not
return a model with these bounded interactions. The reason is that given enough data our learned parameters will
satisfy the bound automatically.

x

θic (xi ) = log µi (xi ) ,

ij∈E

θic (xi , xj ) = log

i

where ID (Xi ; Xj ) is the empirical mutual information between the two variables, and HD (Xi ) is the empirical entropy. The final observation is that the E that maximizes
Eq. 2.7 is the maximum weight spanning tree where edge
weights are given by:
wij = ID (Xi ; Xj )

(2.8)

As mentioned earlier our focus is on high-girth graphs. Recall that a girth of the graph is the length of its shortest
cycle. Our goal will be to learn an E that has girth at least
g, for some fixed g (we refer to this as a girth bounded
graph, implicitly meaning that it is a lower bound). Note
that this significantly complicates likelihood maximization,
since even if the likelihood can be approximated as a sum of
edge weights, finding the maximum weight bounded girth
graph is NP hard (Kortsarz et al., 2008). Thus, we proceed
using a different approach, as explained next.

Algorithm 1 Extended Chow Liu
Require: D, g
1: E = ∅
2: Calculate wij = ID (Xi ; Xj ) for all ij
3: loop
4:
Set S to be all e ∈
/ E that satisfy girth(E ∪ e) > g.
5:
If S = ∅ break.
6:
Find e ∈ S with max we and set E = E ∪ e.
7: end loop
8: Set θ = θ c (see Eq. 2.6).
9: return E, θ

4. Model Assumptions
To provide theoretical guarantees on ECL, we need to make
several assumptions about the true underlying distribution.
These pertain to both the structure and parameters of the
model, as is standard in results of this type.
The following definitions will be needed in what follows.

3. The Extended Chow Liu Algorithm
We first present our algorithm for learning bounded girth
models. Our Extended Chow Liu algorithm (ECL) first

Definition 1. For a graph G and nodes i, j, define Bl (ij)
to be the set of nodes in G that are at distance less
4

When p is large the complexity is O(d2l
max ).

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

than or equal to l from i or j. Namely: Bl (ij) =
{k ∈ V | min{d(i, k), d(j, k)} ≤ l} (e.g., see Anandkumar and Valluvan, 2013). Furthermore, define ∂Bl (ij)
to be the boundary of Bl (ij), so that: ∂Bl (ij) = {k ∈
V | min{d(i, k), d(j, k)} = l}

Lemma 1. Assume the model (G, θ) satisfies A . Then
running belief propagation on the model will converge to
marginals τij (xi , xj ) such that for all ij ∈ E:

Definition 2. Given an  > 0 let LG  define a class of
graphical models where there exists an l ∈ N such that for
all i ∈ V ,and all j ∈ nei(i),

See proof in Section 1 of the supplementary file.

1−<

p(xi , xj |x∂Bl (ij) ; θ)
<1+
p(xi , xj ; θ)

(4.1)

and Bl (ij) is a tree.

|p(xi , xj ; θ) − τij (xi , xj )| ≤ 2

(4.4)

The above restrictions on (G, θ) imply that the model is
in the correlation decay regime, as the following lemma
states.
Lemma 2. If (G, θ) satisfies the A assumptions above,
then the model is in LG  .
See proof in Section 2 of the supplementary file.

Thus LG  are models where the effect of neighbors beyond
l is small, and the l neighborhood is tree structured. In other
words, the models in LG  are locally tree like and exhibit
correlation decay. Similar assumption appear in the literature on belief propagation (Mezard and Montanari, 2009).5
Our assumptions on the learned model are as follows (we
will soon see that they imply the model is in LG  ). Given
an 0 <  < 0.01 we say that (G, θ) satisfies the A assumptions if:
A1:

For all i ∈ V the parameter hi satisfies:
1
1
ln(− 2 − 1) − 1
2

|hi | ≤ hmax ≤

(4.2)

Denote l = b g−1
2 c, where g is the girth of G and η =
.
Then
∀ij
∈ E, the parameters Jij satisfy:
1+e2hmax +2

A2:

1

−1

|Jij | ≤ Jmax ≡ tanh



1
2dmax

2/l 2





η

(4.3)

where dmax is the maximum degree of the graph.
A3:

All edges ij ∈ E satisfy Iθ (Xi ; Xj ) ≥ 13.

The assumptions above are similar to those used elsewhere
(e.g., see Ravikumar et al., 2010; Anandkumar and Valluvan, 2013). They basically rule out interactions that are too
strong or too weak, as well as singleton marginals that are
too peaked. The scale for the interaction strength is determined with respect to the girth of the graph. As the girth
increases the Jij become less constrained.
The key property of the models that satisfy the above is that
inference can be performed with accuracy  using the belief
propagation algorithm. This result has appeared in several
variants in the past (Mezard and Montanari, 2009) and is
given below.
5

Note that this is a different definition from (Anandkumar and
Valluvan, 2013), since we require a multiplicative factor and they
require an additive one.

5. Theoretical Analysis
The goal of this section is to show that ECL results in a
model that is close to optimal in terms of the generalization
likelihood Eq. 2.5. In other words, it learns a model whose
likelihood is close to the likelihood obtained by the true
model. Our Theorem 3 will state that for all , if the true
model satisfies A , then we can get  close to the optimal
likelihood. We perform the analysis in both the n → ∞
sample size limit and for finite samples (e.g., see Tan et al.,
2011, for related results).
We proceed in two steps. First, we show that the graph
learned by the model will contain the true graph (see Section 5.1). Next, assuming that the graph is correct, we show
that the learned parameters will results in a likelihood that
is at worse  suboptimal.
5.1. Structure Consistency
We first address the question of finding the correct graph
structure of the Ising model using ECL. We begin with the
case of n → ∞ IID samples, and show the structure can be
exactly recovered, up to errors on low information edges.6
In the infinite data setting, ECL will receive as input the
correct mutual information values Iθ (Xi ; Xj ). The question then becomes whether this greedy procedure will recover the correct structure given the correct model information. The result is provided in the following theorem.
Theorem 1. Let (G∗ , θ ∗ ) be an Ising model satisfying assumptions A . Denote the model graph by G = (V ∗ , E ∗ ).
Then running ECL with mutual informations Iθ∗ (Xi ; Xj )
calculated from p(x; θ ∗ ) and the true girth of G, will result
in a set of edges E such that:
• If ij ∈ E ∗ then ij ∈ E. Namely, E contains all edges
in E ∗ .
6

If our goal is structure learning, we can discard these edges
by thresholding their information. However this is not our focus
here.

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

• If ij ∈ E \ E ∗ then Iθ∗ (Xi ; Xj ) ≤ 13. Namely,
E contains no redundant edges except possibly those
with mutual information less than 13.
The proof is based on the following two lemmas. The first
states that edges from i to outside Bl (ij) indeed have small
information. See proof in Section 3.1 of the supplementary
file.
Lemma 3. Assume (G, θ) satisfies A . Then for all ij ∈ E
and k ∈
/ Bl (ij) it holds that Iθ (Xi ; Xk ) ≤ 2 .
The following lemma facilitates the greedy ECL algorithm.
It states that in our model the information between nonedges is always less than the information of all edges on
the path between them. See proof in Section 3.2 of the
supplementary file.
Lemma 4. Assume (G, θ) satisfies A . Let ij ∈
/ E be
c.
Let
P ij =
two nodes whose distance in G is q < b g−1
2
{xi = xp1 , . . . , xpq = xj } be a shortest path in the graph
between i and j. Then:
Iθ (Xi ; Xj )+3 < Iθ (Xps ; Xps+1 ) ∀1 ≤ s ≤ q−1 (5.1)
We can now intuitively see why Theorem 1 holds. The
ECL algorithm greedily adds edges as long as they do not
form cycles that violate the girth constraint. According to
Lemma 3 above, edges outside the tree neighborhood of
a node have low information and thus will not be added
(since edges in the tree neighborhoods will have larger information). Within the tree neighborhood Lemma 4 states
that edges that “shortcut” paths in the tree will have lower
information than edges in the path, and thus these “nontree” edges will also not be chosen. A more formal proof is
given in the supplementary file.
5.2. Structure Estimation from Finite Samples
Next we consider the case where the mutual informations
used by ECL are calculated from a finite sample. Intuitively, as more data becomes available the information estimates should improve and we should be able to find the
correct structure with high probability. The following theorem quantifies the number of samples. See proof in Section
3.4 of the supplementary file.
Theorem 2. Assume an IID sample of size n is generated
from a model (G∗ , θ ∗ ) satisfying A . For any δ > 0 let n
satisfy n > N0 where:
C0 log p log 1δ
(5.2)
3
and C0 is a constant. Then with probability greater than
1 − δ ECL will recover E ∗ as in Theorem 1.
N0 =

values, and Lemma 4 which bounds the difference between
different informations, and thus determines the level of resolution required in estimating these.
5.3. Likelihood Optimality
We have thus far proven that the learned graph will contain
the true graph with high probability. However, our goal
is to obtain a complete model where inference can be performed. Thus, we need to also ask how well the parameters
can be learned . Theorem 3 below states that the likelihood
of the learned model will not be too far from the optimal
one. See proof in Section 4.1 of the supplementary file.
Theorem 3. Assume a sample is generated IID from a
model (G∗ , θ ∗ ) satisfying A where  < |E ∗1|−p . Then as
n → ∞ ECL will return (G, θ) such that
L∗ (θ∗ , E ∗ ) − L∗ (θ, E) < 2

where L∗ is the generalization likelihood (see Eq. 2.5).
Note that the above is equivalent to the Kullback Leibler
divergence between p∗ and the learned model being small.
Namely:
DKL [p(x; θ∗ )|p(x; θ)] ≤ 2
(5.4)
Informally, Theorem 3 follows from the following facts:
• The canonical parameters used by ECL maximize the
Bethe likelihood (e.g., see Heinemann and Globerson,
2011).7
• The canonical parameters also satisfy A , and are thus
in LG  .
• For models in LG  the true likelihood and Bethe likelihood are  close.
5.4. Likelihood Optimality from Finite Samples
As in the structure learning case, we can obtain finite sample bounds that guarantee the result in Theorem 3 with high
probability. The following theorem provides such a bound.
Theorem 4. Assume an IID sample of size n is generated
from a model (G∗ , θ ∗ ) satisfying A where  < |E ∗1|−p .
For any α > 0, δ > 0, let n satisfy n > N1 where:
C1 |E ∗ | log 1δ
.
(5.5)
3 α 2
and C1 is a constant. Then ECL will return a model that
satisfies the following with probability greater than 1 − δ:
N1 =

L∗ (θ∗ , E ∗ ) − L∗ (θ, E) < 3 + α ,

(5.6)

where L∗ is the generalization likelihood (see Eq. 2.5).
7

The proof uses Chernoff bounds to verify that the empirical mutual informations are sufficiently close to their true

(5.3)

Generally canonical parameters are not guaranteed to maximize the Bethe likelihood, but here they do because of the assumptions A .

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

We note that there are other methods for consistently learning the parameters of the model. For example, pseudo likelihood can learn the correct parameters given that n → ∞.
Pseudo likelihood in fact has better n → ∞ behavior, since
it is not  suboptimal like our method (e.g., see Bradley
and Guestrin, 2012). However, several factors make our
canonical parameter approach more attractive in practice.
First, the sample complexity of psuedo-likelihood is inferior to ours since the former needs a reliable estimate of
the Markov blanket of each node. Indeed, our experiments
show that ECL requires less data to learn. Second, the
canonical parameters are evaluated simply and in closed
form from the empirical marginals, and do not require an
optimization procedure like pseudo-likelihood. Finally, in
the model learned by pseudo-likelihood there are no guarantees on inference quality since they are not HGCD.

˜(xi , xj ) given as follows:8
µ̄

6. ECL with correlation decay parameters

The advantage of the above scheme is that it will result
in models in LG  and thus guarantee  approximate inference using loopy BP. On the other hand, in cases where the
model does not satisfy assumption A it may be too strict a
constraint to limit ζ as it will limit the correlation that can
be modeled using the learned model.

Our original motivation was that high girth models in the
correlation decay regime can yield high accuracy inference.
However, until now we only made sure to return bounded
girth models, but with no guarantee on correlation decay.
Here we show how ECL can be further modified so that it
is guaranteed to return such models.
Recall that a model is guaranteed to be in LG  if its parameters satisfy |Jij | < ζ, for an appropriately defined ζ (as
in assumption A ). We would thus like to return such a set
of parameters. It turns out we can learn such a model and
preserve all other properties of our algorithm.
The parameter estimates in ECL (i.e., the canonical parameters in Eq. 2.6) are inspired by the parameters that maximize the likelihood for tree structured models. It thus
makes sense to ask what are the parameters that maximize
likelihood for tree models under the constraint |Jij | < ζ. It
turns out that there is a closed form expression for these, as
described next. See proof in Section 5 of the supplementary
file.
Theorem 5. Assume we are given a set of empirical
marginals µ̄, and a tree structured graph G = (V, E).
Then the parameters θ ∗ that maximize the likelihood under
constraints |Jij | ≤ ζ are as follows. Define:

ᾱij

= µ̄ij (1, 1) − µ̄i (1)µ̄j (1)

λ+
ij

= max{0, ᾱij − φ(ζ, µ̄i , µ̄j )}

λ−
ij

= max{0, −ᾱij + φ(−ζ, µ̄i , µ̄j )}

where φ is the function defined in Section 5 of the supplementary file. Use these to define a new set of marginals

|αij | ≤ φ(ζ, µ̄i µ̄j )
xi = xj and αij > φ(ζ, µ̄i , µ̄j )
xi 6= xj and αij > φ(ζ, µ̄i , µ̄j )
xi = xj and αij < φ(−ζ, µ̄i , µ̄j )
xi 6= xj and αij < φ(−ζ, µ̄i , µ̄j )
(6.1)
Then θ ∗ are the canonical parameters calculated from
˜, namely θ ∗ = θ c (µ̄
˜).
marginals µ̄

µ̄ij (xi , xj )


+


 µ̄ij (xi , xj ) − λij
µ̄ij (xi , xj ) + λ+
ij

−

µ̄
(x
,
x
)
+
λ

ij
i
j
ij


µ̄ij (xi , xj ) − λ−
ij

Thus, if we want ECL to return parameters bounded by
ζ will simply use the above parameters instead of θc (µ̄).
Assuming the true parameters satisfy this upper bound (as
in assumption A ) then it’s easy to see that all the results
proven so far will still hold (i.e., structure and parameter
consistency).

We denote the ECL algorithm with the above parameter
bounding scheme by ECLB .

7. Accuracy on Probabilistic Queries
As mentioned in Section 1, the end goal of learning is to answer probabilistic queries. Of course we would like these
answers to be close to the answer of the same query when
performed on the true distribution p∗ (x). Next we show
that this can indeed be achieved by our method, as the following theorem states.
Theorem 6. Assume a sample of size n is generated IID
from a model (G∗ , θ ∗ ) satisfying A where  < |E ∗1|−p . A
parameter θ is learned using the ECLB algorithm with this
sample. To answer the probabilistic query P [xi |xo ] we run
loopy BP on p(x; θ) and denote the resulting probability by
τi (xi |xo ; θ). Then for every α > 0 if n > N1 (see Eq. 5.5)
the following holds with probability greater than 1 − δ:
IEp(xo ;θ∗ ) [DKL [p(xi |xo ; θ ∗ )|τi (xi |xo ; θ)]] ≤ 4 + 2α
(7.1)
The above states that the inferred probabilities are close in
DKL to the true ones, when averaging over the evidence
xo using the true distribution. This averaging is sensible
since if some xo is unlikely to appear which do not want
to penalize for inference errors in this case. Note that we
have provided the result for inferring the probability of a
8
Note that these will be consistent and feasible by construction.

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

single variable xi given a set of variables xo of arbitrary
size. It’s possible to give a similar result for inference on
larger sets of variables. We now turn to the proof, which
simply follows from the previous results.
Proof:
By
Theorem
3
we
have
that
DKL [p(x; θ ∗ )|p(x; θ)] ≤ 2.
Since conditioning
and marginalization only reduce the DKL we have that
IEp(xo ;θ∗ ) [DKL [p(xi |xo ; θ ∗ )|p(xi |xo ; θ)]] ≤ 2. Performing inference using evidence xo is equivalent to
generating a new, smaller, model from p(x; θ) with the
evidence “folded” in. We will need to prove that this new
smaller model is also in LG  , so that inference in it is
well approximated using LBP. Looking at the proof of
Lemma 2 we can see that a model is in LG  even if we
remove the restriction on the singletons. Hence the new
model is indeed in LG  since the original model satisfies
A . By a similar argument to the proof of Lemma 1 we
i)
≤ 1 + . Using the inequality
have that 1 −  ≤ τp(x
i (xi )
−log(1 − ) ≤ 2 for  < 0.5 we have the result.

8. Experiments
Recall that our goal was to learn models that allow more
accurate inference (although not exact) on arbitrary test
queries. In this section we compare ECL to other learning algorithms with respect to this performance measure.
The following baselines are evaluated:

• The structure learning algorithm of (Ravikumar et al.,
2010). This uses L1 regularization and logistic regression to learn the structure of a graphical model. After
learning the model structure, we use psuedo-likelihood
to learn its parameters. For inference we use loopy
BP. We also experimented with using the canonical parameters θ c on the learned structure, but the psuedolikelihood parameters performed better (possibly since
the learned structured is not constrained to be high girth).
We denote this method by L1.

• The structure learning algorithm of Anandkumar and
Valluvan (2013). This procedure constructs tree neighborhoods for each variable and takes their union. It is
guaranteed to be consistent under similar conditions to
our approach, namely high girth graphs with correlation
decay. Similar to the L1 baseline, we use psuedolikelihood to learn the model parameters, and then use loopy
BP for inference. Here again using canonical parameters
resulted in worse performance. The method requires a
parameter r which depends on the true parameters. Since
we run on synthetic models, we provide it with the true
value of r. We call this the T U (for tree union) baseline.

We compare the above two methods to our ECL approach.
The ECL algorithm requires a single parameter, namely a
lower bound g on the girth of the graph. As with the TU
method, since we are using synthetic data, we provided the
correct value of this parameter.9 For ECL, we used the
structure learning algorithm Figure 1, and used loopy belief propagation for inference.
Our focus is inference quality in the learned model, rather
than learning its model structure. Thus, we evaluate on the
accuracy with which the models perform inference. Specifically, we generate 100 random queries as follows: take 5
variables, set their values randomly, and calculate the posterior singleton marginals of the remaining variables. Since
we use relatively small models, we can compare the results
to the correct posterior marginals.
All the models considered have p = 20 variables, so as
to allow exact inference for comparisons. The underlying
graphs were constrained to have a girth of g = 8. This
was done by starting with a random tree structure and then
adding random edges until the girth was achieved. The field
parameters hi were drawn from a uniform distribution on
[−0.1, 0.1]. The scale of the interaction parameters Jij varied, as described next. Note that generally for these models, the assumption A does not hold. Thus, we are in fact
operating in the harder “agnostic” setting.
In what follows we discuss results with respect to the effect
of sample size and model parameters.
8.1. Effect of Sample Size
All the baselines considered are known to converge to the
correct structure given enough data and assumptions on the
true model (the L1 method works under more general conditions than the first two). The psuedolikelihood parameters we use for L1 and T U are also consistent. The parameters used by ECL are O() optimal under our A assumptions. Here we study the effect of sample size on the quality
of the inferred marginals. The parameters Jij were drawn
from a uniform distribution on [−1.1, 1.1].
Figure 1 shows accuracy as a function of sample size. It
can be seen that ECL outperforms the other baselines consistently for all sample sizes considered. Furthermore, as
expected, performance improves with sample size.
8.2. Effect of Interaction Parameter
To test the effect of model parameters, we vary the range of
the Ising interaction parameters Jij . Specifically, their val9

However, we have noticed in many cases that one can search
for g by trying different values, and finding ones for which the
learned model reproduces the marginals of the data. In other
words, it achieves moment matching. See (Heinemann and
Globerson, 2011).

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

ECL
L1
TU

RMSE of Marginals

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0 2
10

ECL
L1
TU

0.016
RMSE of Marginals

0.05

0.014
0.012
0.01
0.008
0.006

3

10

4

10
# Samples

5

10

Figure 1. Inference accuracy of learned model as a function of
sample size.

ues are drawn uniformly from [−c, c] and different values
of c are explored. The graph structure is as in the previous
sections, and the number of samples is always n = 3200.
Figure 2 shows that ECL consistently outperforms the
baselines across all parameter values. For small interaction
values, the model is close to independent and the baselines
all perform similarly. However, as interaction grows, inference in the learned models becomes harder, and thus our
high girth models are likely to perform better.

9. Discussion
Our motivation for this work was to learn graphical models
that can provide accurate inference at test time. We noted
that despite the existence of consistent algorithms for parameter and structure learning, most of these return models
that cannot be used for reliable inference.
As an instance of this general approach of learning usable
models, we showed how one can learn high girth models
with bounded parameters. The advantage is that inference
in these models is theoretically guaranteed to provide answers that are close to exact (with closeness being measured by  in the A assumptions). We provided consistency results which show that the method both returns high
girth models, and is guaranteed to find the correct model
structure as well as come close to the optimal likelihood
and perform accurate inferences, when the true model is
also an HGCD.
Our empirical results demonstrate the utility of our method,
which indeed provides better test time inference performance than other baselines with consistency properties.
One limitation of the analysis presented here is that it as-

0.004
0.1

0.3

0.5

0.7
|J |

0.9

1.1

1.3

ij

Figure 2. Inference accuracy of learned model as a function of the
scale of the interaction parameter.

sumes the true distribution is an HGCD model. However,
it seems like if one wants to obtain guarantees on test time
accuracy such a restriction must be made. For example, if
the true distribution is not constrained, inference in it will
be intractable and it is unlikely that any method will be able
to approximate it well. Indeed, most methods that provide
guarantees on structure learning make assumptions on the
true distribution (e.g., see Anandkumar et al., 2012).
The above “inferning” approach can be extended in many
ways. Basically, any model class that has theoretical approximation guarantees may be the goal of such an approach. One exciting candidate class are expander graphs,
which also exhibit nice theoretical properties for inference
(e.g., see Sipser and Spielman, 1996; Burshtein and Miller,
2001). Learning these may turn out to be harder than the
high girth case, since it is harder to test for expansion. Another interesting family is fast mixing models (Domke and
Liu, 2013). It seems natural to design algorithms which return such models, resulting in guarantees similar to what
we presented here.
Acknowledgments: This work was supported by the ISF
Centers of Excellence grant 1789/11, by the Israel Ministry of
Science and Technology - Knowledge Center in Machine Learning and Articial Intelligence, and by the Intel Collaborative Research Institute for Computational Intelligence (ICRI- CI).

References
A. Anandkumar and R. Valluvan. Learning loopy graphical models with latent variables: Efficient methods and
guarantees. The Annals of Statistics, 41(2):401–435,
2013.

Inferning with High Girth Graphical Models

A. Anandkumar, V. Y. Tan, F. Huang, and A. S. Willsky.
High-dimensional structure estimation in Ising models:
Local separation criterion. The Annals of Statistics, 40
(3):1346–1375, 2012.

T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke. Design of
capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check
codes. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 47
(2):619–637, 2001.

J. Besag. The analysis of non-lattice data. The Statistician,
24:179–195, 1975.

M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman. Expander codes. Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, 42(6):1710–1722,
1996.

J. K. Bradley and C. Guestrin. Sample complexity of
composite likelihood. In N. D. Lawrence and M. Girolami, editors, AISTATS, volume 22 of JMLR Proceedings, pages 136–160. JMLR.org, 2012.
D. Burshtein and G. Miller. Expander graph arguments for
message-passing algorithms. Information Theory, IEEE
Transactions on, 47(2):782–790, 2001.
C. I. Chow and C. N. Liu. Approximating discrete probability distributions with dependence trees. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 14:462–467, 1968.
J. Domke and X. Liu. Projecting ising model parameters
for fast mixing. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, pages 665–673, 2013.
M. Dudı́k, S. Phillips, and R. Schapire. Maximum entropy
density estimation with generalized regularization and
an application to species distribution modeling. J. Mach.
Learn. Res., 8:1217–1260, 2007.
U. Heinemann and A. Globerson. What cannot be learned
with Bethe approximations. In Proceedings of the 27th
Conference Annual Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pages 319–326. AUAI Press, 2011.
A. Jalali, C. C. Johnson, and P. K. Ravikumar. On learning discrete graphical models using greedy methods. In
J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and
K. Weinberger, editors, Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 24, pages 1935–1943. 2011.
D. Koller and N. Friedman. Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques. MIT Press, 2009.
G. Kortsarz, M. Langberg, and Z. Nutov. Approximating maximum subgraphs without short cycles. In Approximation, Randomization and Combinatorial Optimization. Algorithms and Techniques, pages 118–131.
Springer, 2008.
M. Mezard and A. Montanari. Information, physics, and
computation. OUP Oxford, 2009.
P. Ravikumar, M. J. Wainwright, and J. D. Lafferty. Highdimensional Ising model selection using L1 -regularized
logistic regression. Ann. Statist., 38(3):1287–1319,
2010.

V. Y. Tan, A. Anandkumar, L. Tong, and A. S. Willsky.
A large-deviation analysis of the maximum-likelihood
learning of markov tree structures. Information Theory,
IEEE Transactions on, 57(3):1714–1735, 2011.
M. Wainwright. Estimating the ”wrong” graphical model:
Benefits in the computation-limited setting. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 7:1829–1859, 2006.

