Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees

Zhiting Hu
Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

ZHITINGH @ CS . CMU . EDU

Qirong Ho
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

HOQIRONG @ GMAIL . COM

Avinava Dubey
Eric P. Xing
Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University

AKDUBEY @ CS . CMU . EDU
EPXING @ CS . CMU . EDU

Abstract
Practical applications of Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) models have been limited, due to their
high computational complexity and poor scaling on large data. In this paper, we consider
dependent nonparametric trees (DNTs), a powerful infinite model that captures time-evolving
hierarchies, and develop a large-scale distributed training system. Our major contributions include: (1) an effective memoized variational inference for DNTs, with a novel birth-merge strategy for exploring the unbounded tree space;
(2) a model-parallel scheme for concurrent tree
growing/pruning and efficient model alignment, through conflict-free model partitioning and
lightweight synchronization; (3) a data-parallel
scheme for variational parameter updates that allows distributed processing of massive data. Using 64 cores in 36 hours, our system learns a
10K-node DNT topic model on 8M documents
that captures both high-frequency and long-tail
topics. Our data and model scales are orders-ofmagnitude larger than recent results on the hierarchical Dirichlet process, and the near-linear scalability indicates great potential for even bigger
problem sizes.

1. Introduction
Bayesian nonparametric (BNP) methods provide a powerful framework for learning the internal structure of data. For example, Dirichlet processes can be used to cluster with an unbounded number of centers; its derivatives
are used in applications such as storyline tracking (Ahmed
Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

et al., 2011), taxonomy induction (Ho et al., 2012), and
image segmentation (Sudderth & Jordan, 2009), to name a
few. Recently, a flexible dependent nonparametric trees (DNTs) model (Dubey et al., 2014) was developed to induce
hierarchical structures with unbounded width and depth,
which in turn supports cluster creation, evolution, and extinction over time.
Despite their flexibility and expressiveness, practical applications of BNP models have unfortunately been limited
due to their high computational complexity and poor scaling on large data. While there has been recent work on
efficient parallel inference algorithms for BNPs, the problem scales were limited to 100s to 1000s of samples, and
at most 100s of components with a few million parameters
(Table 1). This stands in stark contrast to recent industrialscale algorithms for parametric models (e.g. the LDA topic model (Blei et al., 2003)), which typically handle billions of samples, millions of components, and trillions of
parameters (Yuan et al., 2015). Such big parametric models have been shown to capture long-tail semantics (Wang
et al., 2014) that improve the performance of industrial applications, yet this long-tail capability is, arguably, better
realized using BNP models, with their unlimited and selfadjusting model capacity. Hence, we believe there is an
urgent need to develop highly-scalable solutions for BNPs,
in order to boost their utility on real-world problems.
A second issue is that most existing parallel BNP research
is focused on the (hierarchical) Dirichlet process, and it
is unclear how those techniques might be applied to other BNP models, including the tree-structured models considered in this paper (which are desirable for organizing
information into easily-navigated hierarchies (Ghahramani
et al., 2010; Blei et al., 2010)). The main issue is that tree
models contain additional complex dependencies which
render the inference hard to parallelize, while the changing tree structures can impose costly alignment overheads
between parallel workers (Pan et al., 2013).

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees

To address these challenges, we present a distributed largescale training system for the DNTs model. On the algorithm side, we develop an efficient memoized variational inference (VI) algorithm (Hughes & Sudderth, 2013; Neal &
Hinton, 1998) for DNTs, which incrementally tracks compact summary statistics of the full dataset through simple
accumulation operations, and uses them to update tree node model parameters in a manner that is learning-rate-free
and insensitive to batch size (which are advantages over
stochastic VI (Hoffman et al., 2013)). To ensure unbounded tree width and depth (needed to fully explain large data),
we devise a novel birth-merge strategy (Bryant & Sudderth,
2012; Jain & Neal, 2004) to allow adaptive creation and
pruning of tree nodes.
This tree-structured inference algorithm is executed over
a distributed cluster through a combination of data- and
model-parallelism, interleaved in a manner that maximizes
concurrency among workers. Specifically, our system alternates between two algorithm phases: the first phase is
data-parallel parameter learning, where the tree layout is
held fixed, and workers independently process data batches
in order to update each tree node’s parameters via a parameter server1 . In the second phase, model-parallel structure
updating (in which we update the tree layout), we logically
partition the whole tree across workers, and workers concurrently apply birth-merge operations on their model parts. Here, we design a communication-efficient strategy for
synchronizing tree structures across workers, where only
lightweight operation records are exchanged over the network.
Our VI algorithm and distributed parameter server implementation is able to train large-scale DNTs models: Using
64 cores in 36 hours, our system can process over 8M documents to learn a truncation-free topic tree with 10K topics, in order to capture long-tail semantics. As shown in
Table 1, in terms of data and parameter size, our result is
orders-of-magnitude larger even when compared to recent results on the inferentially simpler hierarchical Dirichlet
process (HDP). To the best of our knowledge, the scales
achieved by our system constitute a new record for treestructured BNP learning. We believe our distributed training strategies, including the conflict-free model alignment
scheme and lightweight record communication, as well as
the combined data- and model-parallelism, could be useful
for scaling up other BNPs.

2. Dependent Nonparametric Trees
Real-world data usually contains rich hierarchical structures (Ghahramani et al., 2010) and exhibits vibrant variation (Ahmed et al., 2011). E.g., some news articles may
1
We use the Petuum parameter server (Ho et al., 2013; Dai
et al., 2015) from petuum.org.

System
Model
Infer alg
Singlemachine
parallel
Multimachine
parallel
Data size
#doc
#token
Model size
#topic
#param
Train time

Williamson
et al.
2013
HDP
HDP
MCMC MCMC
Smyth
et al.
2009

√

Chang
& Fisher III
2014
HDP
MCMC

Bryant
& Sudderth
2012
HDP
VI

Ours
DNTs
VI

√

√

.

.

.

1.5K
2M

2.5K
3M

0.3M
100M

1.8M
120M

8.4M
720M

800
5.6M

80
1.2M

200
20M

600
4.8M

10K
700M

–

7.5hr

28hr

40hr

36hr

√

.

√
√

Table 1. Comparison of recent BNP training frameworks. Results
are quoted from the respective papers.

be related to a general topic “sports” while some others are
about a more specific topic “football”. Additionally, along
the time topics evolve and new topics merge.
To model the time-evolving hierarchically structured data,
Dubey et al. 2014 proposed the dependent nonparametric
trees (DNTs), a dependent nonparametric process with tree
marginals known as the tree-structured stick breaking process (TSSBP) (Ghahramani et al., 2010). TSSBP is an infinite tree,P
where each node  is associated with a mass π
such that  π = 1. Each data point is assigned to any of
the infinitely many internal nodes in the tree, according to
p(zn = ) = π . The TSSBP can be represented using two
interleaving stick-breaking processes – one (parameterized
by α) that determines the size of a node and the other (parameterized by γ) that determines the branching probabilities. Index the root node as node ∅, its (infinite) child nodes
as node 1, node 2, . . . , and the child nodes of node 1 as node 1 · 1, node 1 · 2, . . . , etc. Then the infinite-dimensional
tree is sampled as follows:
ν ∼ Beta(1, α), ψ ∼ Beta(1, γ), π∅ = ν∅ , φ∅ = 1,
Yi−1
Y
φ·i = ψ·i
(1 − ψ·j ), π = ν φ
(1 − ν0 )φ0 ,
0
j=1

 ≺

where 0 ≺  indicates that 0 is an ancestor of .
The temporal variation of the clustering includes two aspects: the sizes of the clusters vary over time, and the locations of clusters in parameter space vary over time. For
the former, the latent variables ν , ψ and π are replaced
(t)
(t)
(t)
with sequences ν , ψ and π indexed by discrete time
t ∈ T . Let N (t) be the number of observations at time
(t)
t; zn be the node assignment of the nth observation at t;
PN (t)
(t)
(t)
X = n=1 I(zn = ) be the number of observationPN (t)
(t)
(t)
s assigned to node  at t; and Y = n=1 I( ≺ zn )
be the number of observations assigned to the descendants

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees

of . Then the prior predictive distribution over the tree at
time t is defined as:

However, despite the parallelizability of the sampling procedures, it can be very costly to align the tree structures
X
X
across processors. To avoid this cost, in practice, the par(t0 )
(t0 )
(t)
Y ),
X , α +
ν ∼ Beta(1 +
allel MCMC algorithm maintains a single copy of the tree
t0
t0
X
X
(t)
(t0 )
(t0 )
(t0 )
(t0 )
model, on which all processors perform the sampling conψ·i ∼ Beta(1 +
X
+
Y
X
,
γ
+
+
Y
),
·i
·i
·j
·j
t0
j>i,t0
currently. This scheme in turn leads to heavy lock contentions between processors, as the shared model keepwhere t0 ∈ N ranges from t − h to t − 1, with h ∈ N bes creating and deleting nodes throughout sampling. This
ing a “window” parameter. Refer to the sequence of trees
(t)
(t)
can severely deteriorates the scalability of the inference, as
(t)
as (Π = ((π ), (φ·i )), t ∈ T ). It is provable that the
shown in our experiments.
marginal posterior distribution of the above dynamic TSSBP at time t follows a TSSBP, which implies the above
3. Truncation-free Memoized VI for DNTs
equation defines a dependent TSSBP.
Distributed learning for BNPs can be difficult: on the algo(t)

Each node is associated with a parameter value θ to model the observed data. Intuitively, within a tree Π(t) , nodes have similar values to their parents; and between trees
(t−1)
(t)
Π(t−1) and Π(t) , corresponding parameters θ
and θ
have similar values. If the data is document, the DNTs can
be used to model evolving hierarchical topics.
Time-varying hierarchical topic models Given a vocabulary of V words, a document can be represented as a V dimensional term frequency vector, that corresponds to a
location on the surface of the (V − 1)-dimensional unit
sphere. The von Mises-Fisher (vMF) distribution of order
V provides a probability density on this space:
f (x; µ, κ) = CV (κ) exp(κµ> x); CV (κ) =

κ.5V −1
.
(2π).5V I.5V −1 (κ)

where parameter µ defines the mean direction; κ is the concentration parameter; and Iv (a) is the modified bessel function of first kind. A mixture of vMF distributions can therefore be used to cluster documents, and the mean direction
µk of the kth cluster can be interpreted as the kth topic.
(t)

The mean parameter θ·i of each node  · i is assigned as:
(t)

(t−1)

θ·i |θ(t) , θ·i
(t)

where, ρ·i

=

(t−1)
κ0 κ1 θ(t) +κ0 κ2 θ·i
(t)
ρ·i

(t)

(t)

(1)

∼ vMF(τ·i , ρ·i ),
(t)

κ0 kκ1 θ

(t−1)

+ κ2 θ·i
(t)

. The root node ∅

k,

(t)

τ·i

=

is assumed to have
(t)

a pseudo-parent node with mean parameter θ−1 set to the
(t)
centroid of the data. Each document xn is sampled ac(t)
(t)
(t)
cording to zn ∼ Discrete(Π(t) ) and xn ∼ vMF(θzn , β).
Parallel MCMC for online inference At each time t the
parameters of tree Π(t) is inferred from data samples of this
epoch, conditioned on the previous trees which are not relearned by backwards passes. Dubey et al. 2014 developed
a parallel Gibbs sampler for tree parameters (Π(t) ) and top(t)
ic indicators (zn ), and a MAP estimator for the location
(t)
parameters (θ ). The parallelization is due to the fact that
the tree parameters Π(t) are conditionally independent giv(t)
(t0 )
en {zn } (and historical {zn }), and vice versa.

rithmic side, correct parallelization of learning algorithms requires appropriate independence structure among variables. On the implementation side, efficient model state
synchronization is necessary due to slow network communication. These issues are made even more challenging in
the context of tree-structured DNTs, which present more
complex inter-variable dependencies; consequently, model
alignment between machines is very communication- and
computation-expensive.
Variational techniques are an appealing starting point for
parallelization, because they introduce model independencies that form natural boundaries for model-parallelism. In
this section, we shall develop a highly-parallelizable variational inference (VI) algorithm for DNTs, and introduce
an accompanying data- and model-parallelization strategy
in the next section. Our key technical contributions are:
(a) we develop a memoized VI technique for DNTs that are
suitable for the distributed setting; (b) we design a novel birth-merge strategy to adaptively update tree structures
and enable unbounded width and depth.
3.1. Parameter Learning
Memoized VI has been shown to be effective on Dirichlet process mixtures. It maintains a compact summary statistics of full dataset, and updates model parameters by
replacing old statistics with new one when visiting a data
batch. The additivity of the summaries allows the variational updates from multiple machines to be efficiently accumulated. Hence the best of the two previous VI algorithms are combined: the efficiency of the stochastic VI
by interleaving global and local updates frequently, and the
robustness of full-data VI by avoiding learning rates.
We first describe the variational updates for the vMF-based
DNTs (details are given in the supplements), then present
how the memoized inference proceeds. Here we focus on
a specific time t and infer the parameters of Π(t) from the
data samples of this epoch. We omit the label t in the following when there is no confusion.
Consider a family of factorized variational distributions:
q(ν, ψ, θ, z) =

Y


q(ν |δ )q(ψ |σ )q(θ |µ , η )

Y
n

q(zn |λn ),

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees
(t)

and assume the factors have the parametric forms:
q(ν |δ ) = Beta(ν |δ ), q(ψ |σ ) = Beta(ψ |σ ),
q(θ |µ , η ) = vMF(θ |µ , η ), q(zn |λn ) = Multi(zn |λn ).

To tractably handle the infinite set of components, we employ a nested truncation: suppose we have a truncated tree
T (with finite number of nodes), then q(zn = ) = 0 for
 ∈
/ T . This forces all data to be explained by only the
nodes in T , while other nodes can be ignored. The truncation is nested such that if a truncated tree T 0 is a subtree of
T then variational distributions over T 0 are a special case of
those over T . Growing T therefore always gives potentially
better solutions.
Variational algorithms aim to minimize KL divergence
from q to the true posterior, which is equivalent to tightening the evidence lower bound (ELBO):

p(ν )p(ψ )p(θ )
L(q) =
E log
∈T
q(ν )q(ψ )q(θ )


XN
p(xn |θzn )p(zn |ν, ψ)
+
E log
.
n=1
q(zn )


X

We optimize L(q) via coordinate ascent, iteratively updating the local parameters (data assignments {λn }) and global parameters (stick-breaking parameters {δ , σ } and data
generating parameters {(µ , η )}).
For observation xn , the optimal solution of λn is given by:

(t)

where ρ·i and τ·i are defined in Eq.1 which encode the
time- and hierarchical-dependency of the nodes in the dependent trees. With the complex dependency, the normaliz(t)
er term E[log CV (ρ·i )] becomes intractable, we therefore
turn to a Taylor approximation, which leads to the updates:
(t)

µ(t)∗ ≈

(t−1)

κ0 (κ1 µ0 + κ2 µ

+

(t)

(t)
i κ1 µi
(t)∗
η

P

η(t)∗ ≈ kκ0 (κ1 µ0 + κ2 µ(t−1)
+


X

hX

i

X

M , E
zn =
λn ,
n
n
hX
i X
s , E
zn xn =
λn xn .
n

(3)

n

The global parameters (at time t) can be updated based on
only these (and historical) summaries. In particular, for the
stick-breaking parameters:
t
X

(t)∗

δ,1 = 1 +

0

(t)∗

M(t ) , δ,2 = α +

t0 =t−h
(t)∗

σ·i,1 = 1 +

t
X

X

t0 =t−h

0

t
X
X

(t0 )

M0 ,

t0 =t−h ≺0
0

(t )

(t)∗

M0 , σ·i,2 = γ +

t
X
X
t0 =t−h

0

(t )

M·j .

j>i

(4)
(t)

Next, optimizing L(q) w.r.t q(θ ), we have:
(t)> (t)
log q ∗ (θ(t) ) = E[ρ(t)
θ ]
 τ
X
(t)
(t) (t)> (t)
+
E[log CV (ρ·i ) + ρ·i τ·i θ·i ]
≺·i
X
+
λn E[βθ(t)> xn ] + const,
n

(t−1)

κ1 µi + aµi

) + βs k,
(5)

(t)
(t)
3(.5V −1)κ0 κ1 κ2
, and ρ̄·i is the same with ρ·i
(t)
ρ̄i
(t)
except that θ is replaced with the mean of the variational
(t)
distribution over θ from the previous iteration.

where a =

Memoized inference Assume the data is divided into B
fixed batches {Bb }, the memoized VI tracks the statistics
for each batch Sb = (Mb , sb ), as well as the full-dataset
statistics S = (M , s ). Note that the additivity of the
sufficient statistics implies that the full-data statistics can
be obtained exactly as the addition of summaries of distinct batches. Hence the memoized inference proceeds by
visiting each batch Bb , updating local parameters for that
batch via Eq.2, and then updating the full-data summaries
for each component by replacing the old statistics of Bb
with new one:
S −=

Sb ,

Sb

←


X

λn ,

n∈Bb

To optimize global parameters of each component , we
store its expected mass M and sufficient statistics s :

(t)

) + βs

i


λ∗n ∝ exp {E[log p(zn = |ν, ψ)] + E[log p(xn |θ )]} . (2)

(t−1)

+ aµi

X

λn xn  , S += Sb .

n∈Bb

(6)

Given the new full-data statistics, the global parameters can
then be updated via Eqs.4-5.
Though the summary statistics require additional memory,
they are compact (at the level of batch, rather than sample)
and highly memory-efficient. Moreover, our algorithm only requires sequential access, as apposed to random access,
to data batches, indicating the data batches (and batch statistics) can be stored in disks. This is also necessary for
handling large data that cannot fit in the memory.
3.2. Tree Structure Updating
We next develop a data-driven birth-merge strategy to dynamically expand and contract the model size. The birth
and merge moves are interleaved with the above variational updates, and are highly parallelizable as each move only
involves a local region of the tree. The nested variational
distributions ensure the stability of the inference.
3.2.1. B IRTH M OVE TO C REATE N EW N ODES
Analog to the stick-breaking process, a birth move creates
a new child for an existing node and appends it to the child

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees

list. The move proceeds as follows: (1) select a target node ; (2) collect a set of data samples X mainly explained
by ; (3) assuming node  has k − 1 children, create a new
child  · k, and estimate  · k’s variational posteriors by a
restricted iteration on X ; (4) adopt the new node.
Target selection Intuitively, a cluster associated with larger
mass is more likely to contain sub-clusters. We therefore
sample a target node  according to the mass M .
Data collection We collect a√subset of data samples where
each sample n has λn > 1/ K. Here K is the number of
existing components. The collected subset is highly related to the target node, and helps to better estimate the new
child’s parameter. Note that the collecting is done when
passing through the data in parameter learning phase, and
introduces little computational overhead.
Child creation In a hierarchical clustering, a high-quality
child cluster is expected to be closely related to its parent, while differing from its siblings. We therefore initialize the variational mean of the vMF emission as µ·k =
P
µ − j µ·j , where a represents the L2-normalization of
a. (If  has no existing child, then µ·k is initialized by the
sample in X which allocates smallest mass on .) We then
update the variational posteriors of node  and ·k through a
restricted VI on data X (Eqs.2-5) until convergence, while
parameters of other nodes are held constant.
Child adoption We always accept the new child without
assessing the change of ELBO produced by the insertion,
and rely on subsequent merge moves to remove redundant
nodes. Since the summary statistics S and S·k were updated based on the target data collection X , data samples
in X are now counted twice in the global summary. We
subtract away X ’s statistics after the new-born node  · k
has been better adapted to the data through the normal variational updates.
A birth operation only requires write access to a node (and
read access to its children). Thus it is straightforward to do
birth moves concurrently on different parts of the tree.
3.2.2. M ERGE M OVE TO R EMOVE R EDUNDANT N ODES
Merge moves delete unneeded nodes and keep the model
compact and efficient. A merge procedure consists of two
steps: (1) select a pair of candidate nodes; (2) if the merge
improves the ELBO, accept the merge.
Candidate selection In the tree-structured clustering, redundancy usually exists between two sibling clusters, or a
child with its parent. We first randomly choose a node a ,
then, from its siblings and parent, randomly select the other node b by the cosine similarity between their variational
means of vMF emissions: sim(a , b ) := µ>
a µb . Note that
the selection does not rely on node mass, since small-mass
component may account for long-tail data.

Merge adoption The additivity (Eq.3) allows the merged
global statistics to be constructed directly. The difference
in the full-data ELBO by the merge can be approximately
computed in constant time using only the node pair’s global
statistics (see the supplements for details). If the merge is
accepted, the child nodes of a are transferred to node b .
A sibling-sibling merge only modifies two nodes of the
same depth, while a parent-child merge will involve two
nodes of different depths. In the next, we design specialized tree partition methods to parallelize the merge moves.

4. Distributed System Implementation
We now present a distributed framework that supports
large-scale training for the DNTs model. Earlier, we described a VI algorithm for DNTs, which consists of two
phases. In the parameter learning phase, the additivity of
the summary statistics (Eq.3) suggests that, parameter updates from distinct workers for the same nodes can be conveniently accumulated, which accelerates convergence if
workers process different data batches concurrently. Moreover, since the tree structure is fixed, the expensive tree
alignment is avoided even if different workers hold their
own model copies. This naturally leads to data parallelism
for this phase.
On the other hand, the structure updating phase changes the
tree structure by adding/removing nodes. By noting that
both birth and merge moves only access to local regions of
the whole tree, we can safely partition the tree into multiple
parts and perform birth-merge moves on each part independently. This leads to model parallelism for this phase.
The two parallel schemes are interleaved, where workers
are independent with each other in each phase. This ensures high degree of parallelism and scalability.
We build our system on top of an open-source distributed
parameter server Petuum (petuum.org). Essentially, a
parameter server (PS) presents a distributed shared memory interface, where worker machines can read/write any
parameter, agnostic to the physical location of the parameter. Petuum provides bounded-asynchronous consistency, which reduces inter-iteration parameter synchronization
times through a staleness parameter s.
Algorithm 1 summarizes the distributed training algorithm
for DNTs. Next we describe the parallel schemes in detail.
4.1. Data Parallelism for Parameter Learning
Figure 1(a) shows the data parallel scheme. We use the PS
to store the full-data statistics {S = (M , s )}, because of
its additivity and easy restoration of other model parameters based on them (Eqs.4-5). The whole dataset is partitioned
and distributed across all workers. Each worker only ever
processes its assigned data shard.

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees
Shared Model
Shared Model
Parameters
Parameters
∆S
∆S

S
S

SS

∆S∆S

Tree Structure
Tree Structure
Change Records
Change Records
Birth record:
Birth record:
(2, 2·1, (2,
S) 2·1, S)

Data-parallel
Data-parallel
Workers
Workers

Model-parallel
Model-parallel
Workers

Workers

Data
Data
Partitions

the same workers (Figure 2). In contrast, even-mode allows
merging between even-depth child nodes and their parents,
and between siblings. The tree is partitioned accordingly.
birth and odd-/even-mode merge are three types of structure updating phases, and are interleaved with the parameter learning phase throughout training (Algorithm 1).

new-born node

new-born node

Partitions

(a) Data parallelism.
(b) Model parallelism.
Figure 1. Architecture: data parallelism in parameter learning
phase and model parallelism in structure updating phase.

Each worker holds a local copy of the full-data statistics,
based on which the variational updates of Eqs.2-5 are conducted. After processing a data batch Bb , the worker sends
the difference of the batch statistics {(Sb,new − Sb,old )} to
the PS, where the global statistics are updated by simple accumulation. This completes an update of the memoized VI
(Eq.6). The worker then fetches the latest global statistics
from the PS to replace its local copy, whereby the updates
from other workers are synchronized. The communication
overhead of global updates is linear to the model size.
depth
1

Lightweight structure synchronization To synchronize
the tree structures, one straightforward method is that each
worker broadcasts its assigned tree parts, to replace the corresponding parts of all local model copies in other workers.
This, however, can cause costly communication overhead.
We adopt an alternative strategy that workers exchange the
operation records, based on which all workers can update
their local model and produce new trees with exactly the
same structure. For birth move, a record is (, ·k, S , S·k ),
where  is the parent node index,  · k is the new-born child
node, and S and S·k are the summary statistics after restricted updates; for merge move, a record is (a , b ), indicating node a is merged into b . The records are therefore
lightweight and can be shared across workers via PS efficiently. Also note that though every worker has to perform
all structure updates, the operations are efficient as no restricted iterations (for birth), or objective evaluation (for
merge) are needed.

2

Algorithm 1 Distributed training for DNTs
3
odd-partition

even-partition

Figure 2. Odd- and even-partition for distributed merge moves. In
both cases, siblings are guaranteed to be in the same parts.

4.2. Model Parallelism for Structure Updating
Figure 1(b) shows the model parallel scheme. The whole
tree is partitioned into multiple parts, and each worker takes
charge of several pieces to perform birth/merge operations.
In practice, there are two key features to be carefully designed: (1) how to partition the tree to minimize dependency between different workers; (2) how to broadcast the local structure modification across all workers for alignment.
Conflict-free model partition Note that each worker physically holds a whole model copy (for data parallelism), so
we only need to partition the tree logically, without actual
transmission of model parts. Since different structure operations have different locality, we design distinct partition
strategies for each of them. For birth moves, the partition
simply guarantees each node is assigned to only one worker (e.g., Figure 1(b)). To avoid duplicated merge (i.e., one
node being merged with multiple others by different workers), we divide merge into two modes: the odd-mode only
allows merging between odd-depth nodes and their parents,
and between siblings. The tree is accordingly partitioned
such that every odd-depth node is assigned to the same
workers with their parents, and all siblings are assigned to

1:
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:
20:
21:
22:
23:
24:
25:
26:
27:
28:
29:
30:
31:
32:
33:

% line 7,17: Data-parallel VI
% line 8-13: Model-parallel (odd/even) merge
% line 16,18-21: Model-parallel birth
Train:
Initialize {Π, µ} randomly
repeat
Memoized VI
Sample (odd/even) merge pairs P ∈ assigned model part
for all (a , b ) ∈ P do
if Lmerge > L then
Send merge record to PS
end if
end for
Read all merge records from PS
Update local model structure
Sample birth nodes Q ∈ assigned model part
Memoized VI and collect target data
for all  ∈ Q do
Restricted update  and  · k
Send birth record to PS
end for
Read all birth records from PS
Update local model structure
until convergence
Data-parallel memoized VI:
for all batch B ∈ assigned data partition do
Update λn for n ∈ B, using Eq.2
Compute new batch statistics {Sb,new }
Send updates {Sb,new − Sb,old } to PS
Read global statistics from PS
Update global parameters, using Eqs.4-5
end for

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees
8

4

11K
Perfect
MCMC
Our System

Average Log-likelihood ( £103 )

Perfect
Our System

4.5

Number of Topics

5.0

3.5
16
32
48
64

3.0

2.5
0

5

10

15

20

25

4

2

cores
cores
cores
cores

30

Speedup

Speedup

3

4.0

35

Hours

Figure 3. Converg on PubMed

1
16

32

48

Number of cores

Figure 4. Speedup on PubMed

5. Experimental Results
Our experiments show that (1) our distributed framework
achieves near-linear (i.e. near-optimal) scalability with increasing number of cores/machines; (2) the DNTs system
enables big tree models (10K nodes) on large data, and well
captures long-tail topics. (3) the proposed VI algorithm
achieves competitive heldout likelihood with MCMC, and
discovers meaningful topic evolution.
5.1. Setup
Datasets We use three public corpora for the evaluation:
• PubMed: 8,400,000 PubMed abstracts. The vocabulary is pruned to 70,000 words. Since no time stamp is
associated, we treat the whole dataset as from 1 epoch.
• PNAS: 79,800 paper titles from the Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 1915-2005. The
vocabulary size is 36,901. We grouped the titles into
10 ten-year epoches.
• NIPS: 1,740 documents from the Proceedings of the
NIPS 1988-1999. The vocabulary size is 13,649. We
grouped the documents into 12 one-year epoches.
Parameter setting For all the experiments, we set κ0 =
100, κ1 = κ2 = 1, and used stick breaking parameters
α = γ = 0.5. We estimate each node’s vMF concentration parameter β from the data according to (Banerjee
et al., 2005). The staleness s for bounded-asynchronous
data parallelism is set to 0, which means workers always
get up-to-date global parameters from the PS.
Compute cluster All experiments were run on a compute
cluster where each machine has 16 cores and 128GB RAM,
connected via 1Gbps ethernet.
5.2. Scalability
We evaluate the scalability of our distributed system w.r.t
the number of cores. Figure 3 shows the convergence
curves on the PubMed dataset. The y-axis represents the
per-document heldout likelihood (on 10% heldout test set).
With increasing number of cores/machines, the model consistently converges faster (and achieves better results, possibly because the noisy parallel updates help to find a better
local optimum).

64

1
1

4

8

9K

7K

5K

3K
0

10

Figure 5. Speedup on PNAS

20

30

40

Hours

Number of cores

Figure 6. Growth of the tree

To measure the speedup gain by distributed training, we
record the running time for each machine setting that the
heldout likelihood achieves L1 , where L1 is the convergence likelihood of single machine (16 cores). The speedup
factor is then computed as the ratio of running time for
1 machine compared to n machines. As shown in Figure 4, our distributed framework demonstrates near-linear
speedup. Specifically, the speedup of using 4 machines
over 1 machine achieves 3.85x.
Near-linear scalability is necessary for industrial scale applications where hundreds or thousands of machines are
used to process billions of samples. Our carefully-designed
data- and model-parallel schemes enable our DNTs framework to be highly scalable: the data-parallel parameter
learning aggregates variational updates from different processors without need of costly tree alignment; while the
model-parallel structure updating explores the tree space by
highly-concurrent birth-merge operations, and aligns model structures via a communication-efficient synchronization
protocol. By interleaving the two modes and keeping processors independent with each other in each mode, high
degree of parallelism and scalability is achieved.
Comparison with parallel MCMC Since the parallel MCMC algorithm (Dubey et al., 2014) (§2) is too slow to
converge on the PubMed dataset, we compare the speedup
on the smaller PNAS data. As shown in Figure 5. Our
system is significantly more scalable than MCMC which
brings only 1.37x speedup on 8 cores. The reason is that,
the parallel samplers maintain a shared tree model in order
to avoid costly inter-processor tree alignment. This in turn
leads to heavy lock contention during sampling, as the tree
nodes keep being deleted and created.
Our system maintains a model copy on each processor to
maximize parallelization for parameter updates, but still
keeps the state alignment efficient by exchanging among
processors conflict-free lightweight operation records. We
compare the running time in the supplements.
5.3. Big Model for Long-tail Semantics
In the parametric literature, big models with millions of
components and trillions of parameters have been shown to
capture long-tail semantics from web-scale corpora, which

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees
mass (π )
27.9
5.9
4.1

top-6 words
at2r, at1r, receptor, type_2,
angiotensin_ii, ang_ii
fusion, thoracoscopic, spinal,
treatment, level, surgery
azt, nucleosides,
pharmacokinetic, monkey,
subcutaneous, methyl

topic label
Angiotensin II
Type-2 Receptor
Thoracoscopic
Spinal Fusion
Pharmacokinetics
with AZT in
Monkeys

Table 2. Long-tail topics from PubMed data. The topic labels are
obtained by looking into the documents associated with the topics.

can improve the performance of industrial applications (Yuan et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2014). Nonparametric models, with their unbounded parameter space, provide
an attractive and automatic way to capture such long tails
without knowing their true size in advance, and our system facilitates the learning of truncation-free big models
on large data.
As an example, Figure 6 shows that the nonparametric tree
on the PubMed dataset (using 4 machines) converges to
over 10K nodes organized into 8 layers. We now look at the
long tail: Table 2 shows three topics with small mass, that
form coherent themes corresponding to small-but-specific
sets of documents. Such ability to target fine-grained topics is valuable to industrial search engines and online ad
systems (Wang et al., 2014).
5.4. Quality of Learned Topics
We also evaluate the quality of the learned topics by heldout average log-likelihood. Table 3 compares with the MCMC. Our algorithm gives competitive heldout likelihood,
validating that the proposed VI is a viable alternative to MCMC for discovering high-quality topics.
Method
PNAS
NIPS

MCMC
(Dubey et al., 2014)
4562±116
9811±232

Our algorithm
4479±103
9712±143

Table 3. Heldout average log-likelihood on two datasets.

Our approach also discovers meaningful topic hierarchies
and variation. Figure 7 shows part of the results obtained
from the NIPS dataset. We can observe two major fields in
the early stage of NIPS, namely, the “cell synapse”-related
research and “neural network”-related research; and both
the popularity and research focuses were changing along
the time.

6. Related Work
There has been growing interest in scalable inference for
BNPs, where much previous work has relied on dataparallelism (Smyth et al., 2009; Doshi-Velez et al., 2009).
One challenge is that maintaining model parameters requires local statistics to be combined, which becomes difficult whenever local model states become misaligned

NIPS 1988
network
neural, time
neurons
input
model
network, time
networks
neural

input, cells
epsp, peak
synaptic

epsp
network
connections neural, matrix
peak, effects
function
cells
state

firing, cells
neurons
cortical
synchrony

cells, model
input, cell
activity

cells, input
firing, spike
cortex

NIPS 1990

…

NIPS 1992

…

model, time
network
input, neural
time

network
neural, model
function
networks
network
training
learning, input
weight

equation
network
differential
equations
method

network
neural
learning, input
networks

synaptic,
input cell,
response
cells

network
neural, model
function
equations

network
training
networks
set, data

network
units, hidden
algorithm
propagation

Figure 7. Variation of topic hierarchies on the NIPS data. Top-5
words of each topic are shown. The thickness of the circles represents the topic popularity. Nodes with small mass are omitted.

(e.g. different number of clusters on each worker) (Pan
et al., 2013). Thus, one must either resort to costly interworker model alignment, or approximation strategies that
can cause slow convergence and inaccurate results (Williamson et al., 2013). We tackle this via an efficient alignment strategy based on conflict-free model partitioning and
lightweight record transmission.
A few recent MCMC algorithms are both data- and modelparallel (Chang & Fisher III, 2014; Willia-mson et al.,
2013), but their reported scales were limited to small datasets with 100s of components, and it is unclear how
these methods can be efficiently applied in the distributed
setting (Gal & Ghahramani, 2014). Our problem scales are
orders of magnitude larger, which is necessary to handle
real-world large data and capture long-tail semantics.
An alternative to MCMC for BNP inference is the variational method (Blei et al., 2006), where Bryant & Sudderth
2012 incorporated split-merge moves (Jain & Neal, 2004)
to enable unbounded number of components. Our DNTs
inference algorithm extends memoized VI (Hughes & Sudderth, 2013; Neal & Hinton, 1998), by applying Taylor approximation (Ahmed & Xing, 2007) to tackle intractability, and coupling it with a highly-parallelizable birth-merge
scheme.

7. Conclusion
We presented a large-scale distributed system for learning dependent nonparametric trees (DNTs), which uses a
novel, distributed truncation-free memoized VI algorithm that exploits both data- and model-parallelism for fast
inference. Efficiency and scalability are achieved via:
(a) conflict-free partitioning and birth-merge operations on
each model partition; (b) synchronization of local model states via lightweight operation records. Consequently, our
distributed system handles much larger problem sizes than
recent BNP training frameworks. We believe that these strategies, particularly the model alignment scheme and the
combined data- and model-parallelism, could be useful for
scaling up other BNP models.
Acknowledgements: This research is supported by NSF
IIS1218282 and NIH R01GM087694.

Large-scale Distributed Dependent Nonparametric Trees

References
Ahmed, Amr and Xing, Eric P. On tight approximate inference of the logistic-normal topic admixture model. In
Proc. of AISTATS, pp. 19–26, 2007.
Ahmed, Amr, Ho, Qirong, Teo, Choon H, Eisenstein, Jacob, Xing, Eric P, and Smola, Alex J. Online inference for the infinite topic-cluster model: Storylines from
streaming text. In Proc. of AISTATS, pp. 101–109, 2011.
Banerjee, Arindam, Dhillon, Inderjit S, Ghosh, Joydeep,
and Sra, Suvrit. Clustering on the unit hypersphere using von Mises-Fisher distributions. In JMLR, pp. 1345–
1382, 2005.
Blei, David M, Ng, Andrew Y, and Jordan, Michael I. Latent Dirichlet Allocation. JMLR, 3:993–1022, 2003.
Blei, David M, Jordan, Michael I, et al. Variational inference for Dirichlet process mixtures. Bayesian analysis,
1(1):121–143, 2006.
Blei, David M, Griffiths, Thomas L, and Jordan, Michael I.
The nested chinese restaurant process and bayesian nonparametric inference of topic hierarchies. JACM, 57(2):
7, 2010.
Bryant, Michael and Sudderth, Erik B. Truly nonparametric online variational inference for hierarchical Dirichlet
processes. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 2699–2707, 2012.
Chang, Jason and Fisher III, John W. Parallel sampling
of HDPs using sub-cluster splits. In Proc. of NIPS, pp.
235–243, 2014.
Dai, Wei, Kumar, Abhimanu, Wei, Jinliang, Ho, Qirong,
Gibson, Garth, and Xing, Eric P. High-performance distributed ml at scale through parameter server consistency
models. In AAAI. 2015.
Doshi-Velez, Finale, Mohamed, Shakir, Ghahramani,
Zoubin, and Knowles, David A. Large scale nonparametric bayesian inference: Data parallelisation in the indian buffet process. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 1294–1302,
2009.

Ho, Qirong, Eisenstein, Jacob, and Xing, Eric P. Document
hierarchies from text and links. In Proc. of WWW, pp.
739–748. ACM, 2012.
Ho, Qirong, Cipar, James, Cui, Henggang, Lee, Seunghak, Kim, Jin Kyu, Gibbons, Phillip B, Gibson, Garth A,
Ganger, Greg, and Xing, Eric P. More effective distributed ML via a stale synchronous parallel parameter server.
In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 1223–1231, 2013.
Hoffman, Matthew D, Blei, David M, Wang, Chong, and
Paisley, John. Stochastic variational inference. JMLR,
14(1):1303–1347, 2013.
Hughes, Michael C and Sudderth, Erik. Memoized online
variational inference for Dirichlet process mixture models. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 1133–1141, 2013.
Jain, Sonia and Neal, Radford M. A split-merge Markov
chain Monte Carlo procedure for the Dirichlet process
mixture model. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 13(1), 2004.
Neal, Radford M and Hinton, Geoffrey E. A view of the
EM algorithm that justifies incremental, sparse, and other variants. In Learning in graphical models, pp. 355–
368. Springer, 1998.
Pan, Xinghao, Gonzalez, Joseph E, Jegelka, Stefanie,
Broderick, Tamara, and Jordan, Michael I. Optimistic
concurrency control for distributed unsupervised learning. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 1403–1411, 2013.
Smyth, Padhraic, Welling, Max, and Asuncion, Arthur U.
Asynchronous distributed learning of topic models. In
Proc. of NIPS, pp. 81–88, 2009.
Sudderth, Erik B and Jordan, Michael I. Shared segmentation of natural scenes using dependent Pitman-Yor processes. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 1585–1592, 2009.
Wang, Yi, Zhao, Xuemin, Sun, Zhenlong, Yan, Hao, Wang,
Lifeng, Jin, Zhihui, Wang, Liubin, Gao, Yang, Law,
Ching, and Zeng, Jia. Peacock: Learning long-tail topic
features for industrial applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:1405.4402, 2014.

Dubey, Kumar, Ho, Qirong, Williamson, Sinead A, and Xing, Eric P. Dependent nonparametric trees for dynamic
hierarchical clustering. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 1152–1160,
2014.

Willia-mson, Sinead, Dubey, Avinava, and Xing, Eric. Parallel Markov chain Monte Carlo for nonparametric mixture models. In Proc. of ICML, pp. 98–106, 2013.

Gal, Yarin and Ghahramani, Zoubin. Pitfalls in the use of
parallel inference for the Dirichlet process. In Proc. of
ICML, pp. 208–216, 2014.

Yuan, Jinhui, Gao, Fei, Ho, Qirong, Dai, Wei, Wei, Jinliang, Zheng, Xun, Xing, Eric P, Liu, Tie-Yan, and Ma,
Wei-Ying. Lightlda: Big topic models on modest compute clusters. Proc. of WWW, 2015.

Ghahramani, Zoubin, Jordan, Michael I, and Adams,
Ryan P. Tree-structured stick breaking for hierarchical
data. In Proc. of NIPS, pp. 19–27, 2010.

