BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word
Alignments

Stephan Gouws
Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA

SGOUWS @ GOOGLE . COM

Yoshua Bengio
Dept. IRO, Université de Montréal, QC, Canada & Canadian Institute for Advanced Research
Greg Corrado
Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA

Abstract
We introduce BilBOWA (Bilingual Bag-ofWords without Alignments), a simple and
computationally-efficient model for learning
bilingual distributed representations of words
which can scale to large monolingual datasets
and does not require word-aligned parallel training data. Instead it trains directly on monolingual
data and extracts a bilingual signal from a smaller
set of raw-text sentence-aligned data. This is
achieved using a novel sampled bag-of-words
cross-lingual objective, which is used to regularize two noise-contrastive language models for efficient cross-lingual feature learning. We show
that bilingual embeddings learned using the proposed model outperform state-of-the-art methods
on a cross-lingual document classification task as
well as a lexical translation task on WMT11 data.

1. Introduction
Raw text data is freely available in many languages, yet
labeled data – e.g. text marked up with parts-of-speech
or named-entities – is expensive and mostly available for
English. Although several techniques exist that can learn
to map hand-crafted features from one domain to another
(Blitzer et al., 2006; Daumé III, 2009; Pan & Yang, 2010),
it is in general non-trivial to come up with good features
which generalize well across tasks, and even harder across
different languages. It is therefore very desirable to have
unsupervised techniques which can learn useful syntactic
and semantic features that are invariant to the tasks or lanProceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

guages that we are interested in. Unsupervised distributed
representations of words capture important syntactic and
semantic information about languages and these techniques
have been succesfully applied to a wide range of tasks (Collobert et al., 2011; Turian et al., 2010), across many different languages (Al-Rfou’ et al., 2013). Traditionally, inducing these representations involved training a neural network
language model (Bengio et al., 2003) which was slow to
train. However, contemporary word embedding models are
much faster in comparison, and can scale to train on billions
of words per day on a single desktop machine (Mnih &
Teh, 2012; Mikolov et al., 2013b; Pennington et al., 2014).
In all these models, words are represented by learned, realvalued feature vectors referred to as word embeddings and
trained from large amounts of raw text. These models have
the property that similar embedding vectors are learned for
similar words during training. Additionally, the vectors
capture rich linguistic relationships such as male-female
relationships or verb tenses, as illustrated in Figure 1 (a)
and (b). These two properties improve generalization when
the embedding vectors are used as features on word- and
sentence-level prediction tasks.
Distributed representations can also be induced over different language-pairs and can serve as an effective way
of learning linguistic regularities which generalize across
languages, in that words with similar distributional syntactic and semantic properties in both languages are represented using similar vectorial representations (i.e. embed
nearby in the embedded space, as shown in Figure 1 (c)).
This is especially useful for transferring limited label information from high-resource to low-resource languages,
and has been demonstrated to be effective for document
classification (Klementiev et al., 2012), outperforming a
strong machine-translation baseline; as well as namedentity recognition and machine translation (Zou et al.,
2013; Mikolov et al., 2013a).

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

Figure 1. (a & b) Monolingual embeddings have been shown to capture syntactic and semantic features such as noun gender (blue) and
verb tense (red). (c) The (idealized) goal of crosslingual embeddings is to capture these relationships across two or more languages.

Since these techniques are fundamentally data-driven techniques, the quality of the learned representations improves
as the size of the training data improves (Mikolov et al.,
2013b; Pennington et al., 2014). However, as we will
discuss in more detail in §2, there are two significant
drawbacks associated with current bilingual embedding
methods: they are either very slow to train or they can
only exploit parallel training data. The former limits the
large-scale application of these techniques, while the latter
severely limits the amount of available training data, and
furthermore introduces a big domain bias into the learning
process, since parallel data is typically only easily available
for certain narrow domains (such as parliamentary discussions).
This paper introduces BilBOWA (Bilingual Bag-of-Words
without Word Alignments), a simple, scalable technique for
inducing bilingual word embeddings with a trivial extension to multilingual embeddings. The model is able to
leverage essentially unlimited amounts of monolingual raw
text. It furthermore does not require any word-level alignments, but instead extracts a bilingual signal directly from
a limited sample of sentence-aligned, raw-text parallel data
(e.g. Europarl) which it uses to align embeddings as they
are learned over monolingual training data. Our contributions are the following:
• We introduce a novel, computationally-efficient sampled cross-lingual objective (“BilBOWA-loss”) which
is employed to align monolingual embeddings as they
are being trained in an online setting. The monolingual models can scale to large-scale training sets,
thereby avoiding training bias, and the BilBOWAloss only considers sampled bag-of-words sentencealigned data at each training step, which scales extremely well and also avoids the need for estimating

word-alignments (§3.2);
• we experimentally evaluate the induced cross-lingual
embeddings on a document-classification (§5.1) and
lexical translation task (§5.2), where the method outperforms current state-of-the-art methods, with training time reduced to minutes or hours compared to several days for prior approaches;
• finally, we make available our efficient Cimplementation1 to hopefully stimulate further
research on cross-lingual distributed feature learning.

2. Learning Cross-lingual Word Embeddings
Monolingual word embedding algorithms (Mikolov et al.,
2013b; Pennington et al., 2014) learn useful features about
words from raw text (e.g. Fig 1 (a) & (b)). These algorithms are trained over large datasets to be able to predict
words from the contexts in which they appear. Their working can intuitively be understood as mapping each word
to a learned vector in an embedded space, and updating
these vectors in an attempt to simultaneously minimize the
distance from a word’s vector to the vectors of the words
with which it frequently co-occurs. The result of this optimization process yields a rich geometrical encoding of the
distributional properties of natural language, where words
with similar distributional properties cluster together. Due
to their general nature, these features work well for several
NLP prediction tasks (Collobert et al., 2011; Turian et al.,
2010).
In the cross-lingual setup, the goal is to learn features
which generalize well across different tasks and different
languages. The goal is therefore to learn features (embeddings) for each word such that similar words in each lan1

https://github.com/gouwsmeister/bilbowa

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

guage are assigned similar embeddings (the monolingual
objectives), but additionally we also want similar words
across languages to have similar representations (the crosslingual objective). The latter property allows one to use
the learned embeddings as features for training a discriminative classifier to predict labels in one language (e.g. topics, parts-of-speech, or named-entities) where we have labelled data, and then directly transfer it to a language for
which we do not have much labelled data. From an optimization perspective, there are several approaches to how
one can optimize these two objectives (our classification):
O FFLINE A LIGNMENT: The simplest approach is to optimize each monolingual objective separately (i.e. train embeddings on each language separately using any of the several available off-the-shelve toolkits), and then enforce the
cross-lingual constraints as a separate, disjoint, ‘alignment’
step. The alignment step consists of learning a transformation for projecting the embeddings of words onto the embeddings of their translation pairs, obtained from a dictionary. This was shown to be a viable approach by (Mikolov
et al., 2013a) who learned a linear projection from one embedding space to the other. It was extended by (Faruqui &
Dyer, 2014), who simultanteously projected source and target language embeddings into a joint space using canonical
correlation analysis. The advantage of this approach is that
it is very fast to learn the embedding alignments. The main
drawback of this approach is that it is not clear that a single transformation (whether linear or nonlinear) can capture the relationships between all words in the source and
target languages, and our improved results on the translation task seem to point to the contrary (§5.2). Furthermore,
an accurate dictionary is required for the language-pair and
the method considers only one translation per word, which
ignores the rich multi-sense polysemy of natural languages.
PARALLEL - ONLY: Alternatively, one may leverage purely
sentence-aligned parallel data and train a model to learn
similar representations for the aligned sentences. This is
the approach followed by the BiCVM (Hermann & Blunsom, 2013) and the bilingual auto-encoder (BAE, (Chandar et al., 2014)). The advantage of this approach is that it
can be fast when using an efficient noise-contrastive training criterion like that of the BiCVM. The main drawbacks
of this method are that it can only train on limited parallel data, which is expensive to obtain and not necessarily
written in the same style or register as the domain where
the features might be applied (i.e. there is a strong domain
bias).
J OINTLY- TRAINED M ODELS : Another approach is to
jointly optimize the monolingual objectives L(·), with the
cross-lingual objective enforced as a cross-lingual regularizer (see Figure 2 for a schematic). To do this, we define
a cross-lingual regularization term Ω(·), and use it to con-

Figure 2. Schematic of the proposed BilBOWA model architecture for inducing bilingual word embeddings. Two monolingual
skipgram models are jointly trained while enforcing a sampled
L2 -loss which aligns the embeddings such that translation-pairs
are assigned similar embeddings in the two languages.

strain monolingual models as they are jointly being trained
over the context h and target word wt training pairs in the
dataset D, e.g.
X
X
L = min
Ll (wt , h; θl ) +λ Ω(θe , θf ) .
|
{z
}
| {z }
θ e ,θ f
l
l∈{e,f } wt ,h∈D

feature learning

alignment

(1)
This formulation captures the intuition that we want to
learn representations which model their individual languages well (the first term) while the Ω(·) regularizer encourages representations to be similar for words that are
related across the two languages. Conceptually, this regularizer consists of minimizing a distance function between
the vector representations ri learned for words wi in the
two domains, weighted by how similar they are, i.e.
X X
Ω(Re , Rf ) =
sim(wi , wj ) · distance(rei , rfj ).
wi ∈V e wj ∈V f

(2)
where we use R to denote learned embedding representations, and ri to denote the embedding learned for word
wi . In other words, when this weighted sum (and hence
its contribution to the total objective) is low, one can be
sure that words across languages that are similar (i.e. high
sim(wi , wj )) will be embedded nearby each other.
This approach was shown to be useful by (Klementiev
et al., 2012). Crucially, the advantages of this formulation
are that it enables one to train on any available monolingual data, which is both more abundant and less biased
than the parallel-only approach, since one can train on data
which resembles the data one will be applying the learned
features to. The disadvantage is that the original model
of Klementiev et al. is extremely slow to train. The training complexity stems both from how the authors imple-

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

ment their monolingual and cross-lingual objectives. For
the monolingual objective, they train a standard neural language model for which the complexity of the output softmax layer grows with the output vocabulary size. Therefore, in order to evaluate the model the authors had to reduce the output vocabulary to only the 3000 most frequent
words. The second reason for the slow training time is
that the cross-lingual objective considers the interactions
between all pairs of words (in the worst case) between the
source and target vocabulary at each training step, which
scales as the product of the two vocabularies2 . In this work,
we address these two issues individually.

3. The BilBOWA Model
As discussed in §2, the primary challenges with existing
bilingual embedding models are their computational complexity (due to an expensive softmax or an expensive regularization term, or both), but most importantly, the strong
domain bias that is introduced by models that train only on
parallel data such as Europarl.

mized a margin between the observed score and the noise
scores. In their formulation, scores were computed on sequences of words, but in (Mikolov et al., 2013a) this idea
was taken one step further and successfully applied to bagof-word representations of contexts in their continuous bagof-words (CBOW) and skipgram models trained using the
negative sampling training objective (a simplified version
of noise-contrastive estimation (Mnih & Teh, 2012)). Any
of these objectives would yield comparable speedup and
could be used in our architecture. In this work we opted for
the skipgram model trained using negative sampling since
it has been shown to learn high-quality monolingual features.
3.2. Learning Cross-lingual Features: The
BilBOWA-loss (Ω term)

The BilBOWA model is designed to overcome these issues
in order to enable computationally-efficient cross-lingual
distributed feature learning over large amounts of monolingual text. A schematic overview of the model is shown in
Figure 2. The two main aspects (discussed in the following
sections) are

Besides learning how words in one language relate to each
other, it is equally important for the representations to capture how words between the two languages relate to each
other, which we enforce using the Ω term in equation 1. In
the general bilingual setting, word similarities can be expressed as a matrix A where aij encodes the translation
“score” of word i in one language with word j in the other.
In the rest of our discussion we will refer to English and
French, and denote all English-specific parameters using e
superscript, and all French-specific parameters with f superscript.

1. First, similar to (Zou et al., 2013), we leverage advances in monolingual feature learning algorithms by
replacing the softmax objective with a more efficient
noise-contrastive objective (§3.1), allowing monolingual training updates to scale independently of the vocabulary size.

If the K-dimensional word embedding row-vectors ri are
stacked to form a (V, K)-dimensional matrix R, then we
can express what we will refer to as the exact cross-lingual
objective as follows:
XX
ΩA (Re , Rf ) =
aij ||rei − rfj ||2
(3)

2. Second, we introduce a novel computationallyefficient cross-lingual loss which only considers sampled, bag-of-words sentence-aligned data for the
cross-lingual objective (§3.2). This avoids the need for
estimating word alignments, but moreover, the computation of the regularization term reduces to only the
words in the observed sample (compared to considering the O(V 2 ) worst-case possible interactions at each
training step in the naive case).
3.1. Learning Monolingual Features: The L term
Since we do not care about language modelling, but more
about feature learning, an alternative to the softmax is to
use a noise-contrastive approach to score valid, observed
combinations of words against randomly sampled, unlikely
combinations of words. This idea was introduced by Collobert and Weston (Collobert et al., 2011) where they opti2

If we limit each word to align to k words this is still O(V k).

i

j

= (R − Rf )> A(Re − Rf ).
e

(4)

where subscript A indicates that the alignments are fixed
(given). A captures the relationships between all V e words
in English with respect to all V f words in French, and is
indeed also the source of the two main challenges in this
formulation, namely:
1. how to derive or learn which words to pair as translation pairs (i.e. deriving/learning A);
2. how to efficiently evaluate Ω(·) during training, since
naively evaluating it scales as the product of the two
vocabulary sizes O(|V e | · |V f |) at each training step.
The cross-lingual objective therefore penalizes the Euclidian distance between words in the two embedding spaces
(Re and Rf ) proportional to their alignment frequency.
Previous work approached this step by performing a word-

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

Figure 3. Using global word-alignments for aligning cross-lingual embeddings (equation 3) is costly and scales as the product of the two
vocabulary sizes. In contrast, the BilBOWA-loss (equation 7) approximates the global loss by averaging over implicit local co-occurrence
statistics in a limited sample of parallel sentence-pairs.

alignment step prior to training to learn the alignment matrix A. However, performing word alignment requires running Giza++ (Och & Ney, 2003) or FastAlign (Dyer et al.,
2013) software and training HMM word-alignment models. This is both computationally costly and also noisy. We
would like to learn the translation correspondences without
utilizing word alignments. In order to do that, we directly
exploit the parallel training data. The main contribution of
this work is to approximate the costly Ω(·) term, defined in
equation 3 in terms of the global word-alignment statistics,
using cheaply-obtained local word co-occurrence statistics
obtained from raw-text parallel sentence-pairs (i.e. without
running a word-alignment step). The main concept is illustrated schematically in Figure 3, and discussed in more
detail below.
As a first step, notice that since the alignment weights can
be normalized to sum to one, we can interpret the alignment
weights as a distribution and write equation 3 as an expectation over the distribution of English and French wordalignment probabilities aij = P (wie , wjf ),
h
i
ΩA (Re , Rf ) =
E
||rei − rfj ||2
(5)
(i,j)∼P (we ,wf )

Since the parallel data is paired at the sentence level, we
know that translation pairs for the en sentence occur in the
fr sentence, but we do not know where. We therefore need
a word-alignment model. A naive assumption is to assume
that each observed en word can potentially be aligned with
each observed fr word (i.e. to assume a uniform wordalignment model), for each word in the observed sentence

pairs. Under this assumption, one can then approximate
equation 5 by sampling S m-length English and n-length
French sentence-pairs (se , sf ) from the parallel training
data:
1 X
1 X X
ΩA (Re , Rf ) ≈
||rei − rfj ||2
S e f
mn w ∈se
f
(s ,s )∈S

i

wj ∈s

(6)
It is important to note that the lengths of the sampled English and French parallel sentences m and n need not be
equal, and more importantly m  |V e | and n  |V f |.
Furthermore, notice that under a uniform alignment model,
at each training step, each word in the sampled English sentence se will be updated towards all words in the French
sentence sf . We can precompute this by simply updating
each English word towards the mean French bag-of-words
sentence-vector. Specifically, we implement equation 6 by
sampling only one parallel sentence-pair per training step
(i.e. S = 1), and at each training step t we optimize the following sampled, approximate cross-lingual objective:
(t)

ΩA (Re , Rf ) , ||

m
n
1 X e 1 X f 2
ri −
rj ||
m w ∈se
n
f
i

(7)

wj ∈s

where s∗ denotes the English or French sampled sentencepair drawn from the parallel corpus. In other words, the
BilBOWA-loss minimizes a sampled L2 -loss between the
mean bag-of-words sentence-vectors of the parallel corpus.
On its own, this objective is degenerate since all embeddings would converge to the trivial solution (by collapsing
all embeddings to the same value), but coupled as a regu-

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

larizer with the monolingual losses, we find that it works
very well in practice. By sampling training sentences from
the parallel document distribution, this objective efficiently
approximates equation 3 (the more two words are observed
together in a parallel sentence-pair, the stronger the embeddings for the two words will be pushed together, i.e. proportional to aij ), without having to actually compute the word
alignment weights aij .
3.3. Parallel subsampling for better results
Equation 7 is an approximation of equation 3. As illustrated in Figure 3, we are really interested in estimating the
global word-alignment statistics for a word-pair, i.e. aij .
However, by sampling words at the sentence-level, the local alignment statistics are skewed by the words’ unigram
frequencies of occurrence in a given sentence (i.e. regardless of alignment). Since language has a very strong Zipfian
distribution we therefore find in practice that equation 7
over-regularizes the frequent words. A simple solution to
this is to subsample (discard) words from the parallel sentences proportional to their unigram probabilities of occurrence. In other words, we discard each word from the parallel sentences with a probability that depends on its unigram
frequency of occurrence. This heavily discards frequent
words and effectively flattens the unigram distribution to
a uniform distribution. This idea is closely related to the
monolingual subsampling employed in the word2vec models, although it is motivated for a different reason in the
cross-lingual setting to obtain a better approximation of the
global word-alignment statistics from the local sentencelevel co-occurrence statistics (see Figure 3).
In practice we found this useful to learn finer-grained crosslingual embeddings for the frequent words. To better illustrate the effect this has on training, we jointly visualized the
top-25 most frequent words in English and German using
the t-SNE algorithm. This is illustrated in Figure 4. We
show in red the embeddings trained without subsampling
and in blue the embeddings for the same words trained using parallel subsampling. As the visualization shows, without subsampling frequent words are over-regularized and
cluster near the origin. This effect is largely reduced by the
proposed subsampling scheme.

4. Implementation and Training Details
We implemented our model in C by building on the popular open-source word2vec toolkit3 . The implementation launches a monolingual skipgram model as a separate
thread for each language, as well as a cross-lingual thread.
All threads access the shared embedding parameters asynchronously. For training the model, we make use of online
3

https://code.google.com/p/word2vec/

Figure 4. A joint t-SNE visualization of the same 25 most frequent English and German words trained without (red, left) and
with parallel subsampling (blue, right), illustrating the effect that
occurs without parallel subsampling, as frequent words are overregularized towards the origin.

asynchronous stochastic gradient descent (ASGD), where
at time step t, parameter θ is updated as
θ(t) = θ(t−1) − η

∂L
∂θ

(8)

Our initial implementation synchronized updates between
threads, but we found that simply clipping individual updates to [−0.1, 0.1] per thread was sufficient to ensure training stability and considerably improved training speed. For
monolingual training data, we use the freely available, pretokenized Wikipedia datasets (Al-Rfou’ et al., 2013). For
cross-lingual training we use the freely-available Europarl
v7 corpus (Koehn, 2005). Unlike the approach of (Klementiev et al., 2012) however, we do not need to perform
a word-alignment step first. Instead our implementation
trains directly on the raw parallel text files obtained after applying the standard preprocessing scripts that come
with the data to tokenize, recase and remove all empty
sentence-pairs. Embedding matrices were initialized by
drawing from a zero mean, unit-variance gaussian distribution. The skipgram negative sampling objectives (a simplified form of noise-contrastive estimation) require us to
sample k noise words per training pair from the unigram
P (w) en and fr distributions, and we set k = 15 which has
been shown to give good results.
Doing each training update therefore occurs asynchronously across the threads. Monolingual threads each
select a context-target (h,wt )-pair for each language and
sample k noise words according to their unigram noise distributions. The cross-lingual thread samples a random pair
of parallel sentences from the parallel data. Finally, each
thread makes an update to all parameters asynchronously
according to equation 8, for which gradients are easy to

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

compute due to the square-loss of the BilBOWA-loss and
the log-linear nature of the skipgram models. The learning
rate was set to 0.1, with linear decay.

5. Experiments
In this section we present experiments which evaluate the
utility of the induced representations. We evaluate the embeddings in a cross-lingual document classification task
which tests semantic transfer of information across languages, as well as a word-level translation task which tests
fine-grained lexical transfer.
5.1. Cross-lingual Document Classification
We use an exact replication of the cross-lingual document
classification (CLDC) setup introduced by Klementiev et
al. (Klementiev et al., 2012) to evaluate their cross-lingual
embeddings. The CLDC task setup is as follows: The goal
is to classify documents in a target language using only labelled documents in a source language. Specifically, we
train an averaged perceptron classifier on the labelled training data in the source language and then attempt to apply
the classifier as-is to the target data (known as “direct transfer”). Documents are represented as the tf-idf-weighted
sum of the embedding vectors of the words that appear in
the documents.
Similar to Klementiev, we induce cross-lingual embeddings for the English-German language pair, and use the induced representations to classify a subset of the English and
German sections of the Reuters RCV1/RCV2 multilingual
corpora (Lewis et al., 2004) as pertaining to one of four categories: CCAT (Corporate/Industrial), ECAT (Economics),
GCAT (Government/Social), and MCAT (Markets).
For the classification experiments, 15,000 documents (for
each language) were randomly selected from the RCV1/2
corpus, with one third (5,000) used as the test set and the
remainder divided into training sets of sizes between 100
and 10,000, and a separate, held-out validation set of 1,000
documents used during the development of our models.
Since our setup exactly mirrors Klementiev et al, we use
the same baselines, namely: the majority class baseline,
glossed (replacing words in the target document by their
most frequently aligned words in the source language), and
a stronger MT baseline (translating target documents into
the source language using an SMT system).
Results are summarized in Table 1. In order to make all
results comparable, results for all methods reported here
were obtained using the same embedding dimensionality
of 40 and the same training data. We use the first 500K
lines of the English-German Europarl data both as monolingual and parallel training data. We use a vocabulary size
of 46, 678 for English and 47, 903 for German. Since our

method is motivated as a faster version of the model proposed by Klementiev et al., we note that we significantly
improve upon their results, while training in 6 minutes versus the original 10 days (14,400 minutes). This yields a
total factor 2, 400 speedup. This demonstrates that the BilBOWA loss (equation 7) is both a computationally-efficient
and an accurate approximation of the full cross-lingual objective implemented by Klementiev (equation 3).
Next, we compare our method to the current state-of-the-art
bilingual embedding methods. The current state-of-the-art
on this task is 91.8 (en2de) and 72.8 (de2en) reported using the Bilingual Auto-encoder (BAE) model by (Chandar
et al., 2014). Hermann et al. (Hermann & Blunsom, 2013)
report 83.7 and 71.4 with the BiCVM model. As shown,
our model outperforms the BiCVM on both tasks, and outperforms BAEs on German to English to yield a current
state-of-the-art result on that task of 75%. The runtime of
our method also compares very favorably to other methods. Note that even though the BiCVM method should in
principle be as fast or faster than our method, its reported
training time here is slightly higher since it was trained for
more iterations over the data.
5.2. WMT11 Word Translation
We also evaluated the induced cross-lingual embeddings on
the word translation task used by Mikolov et al. (Mikolov
et al., 2013a) using the publicly-available WMT11 data4 .
In this task, the authors extracted the 6K most frequent
words from the WMT11 English-Spanish data, and then
used the online Google Translate service to derive dictionaries by translating these source words into the target language (individually for English and Spanish). Since their
method requires translation-pairs for training, they used the
first 5K most frequent words to learn the “translation matrix”, and then evaluated their method on the remaining 1K
words used as a test set. To translate a source word, one
finds its k nearest neighbours in the target language embedding space, and then evaluate the translation precision
P @k as the fraction of target translations that are within
the top-k words returned using the specific method. Our
method does not require translation-pairs for training, so
we simply test on the same 1K test-pairs.
We use as baselines the same two methods described in
(Mikolov et al., 2013a). Edit Distance ranks words based
on their edit-distance. Word Co-occurrence is based on distributional similarity: For each word w, one first constructs
a word co-occurrence vector which counts the words with
which w co-occurs within a 10-word window in the corpus.
The word-count vectors are then mapped from the source
to the target language using the dictionary. Finally, for each
test word, the word with the most similar vector in the tar4

http://www.statmt.org/wmt11/

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments
Method
Majority Baseline
Glossed Baseline
MT Baseline
Klementiev et al.
Bilingual Auto-encoders (BAEs)
BiCVM
BilBOWA (this work)

en → de
46.8
65.1
68.1
77.6
91.8
83.7
86.5

de → en
46.8
68.6
67.4
71.1
72.8
71.4
75

Training Time (min)
14,400
4,800
15
6

Table 1. Classification accuracy and training times for the proposed BilBOWA method compared to Klementiev et al. (Klementiev et al.,
2012), Bilingual Auto-encoders (Chandar et al., 2014), and the BiCVM model (Hermann & Blunsom, 2013), on an exact replica of the
Reuters cross-lingual document classification task. These methods were all used to induce 40-dimensional embeddings using the same
training data. Baseline results are from Klementiev.
Method
Edit Distance
Word Co-occurrence
Mikolov et al., 2013
BilBOWA (this work)

En→Sp P@1
13
30
33
39 (+6)

Sp→En P@1
18
19
35
44 (+9)

En→Sp P@5
24
20
51
51

Sp→En P@5
27
30
52
55 (+3)

Table 2. Results for the translation task measured as word translation accuracy (out of 100, higher is better) evaluated on the top-1 and
top-5 words as ranked by the method. Cross-lingual embeddings are induced and distance in the embedded space are used to select word
translation pairs. +x indicates improvement in absolute precision over the previous state-of-the-art on this task (Mikolov et al., 2013a).

get language is selected as its translation.
The results on the English-Spanish translation tasks are
summarized in Table 2. We induced 40-dimensional embeddings using the English and Spanish Wikipedias and
Europarl as parallel data. Our model improves on both
the baselines and on Mikolov et al.’s method on both tasks
and gives a noticeable improvement in accuracy for the
P @1 prediction. For the English to Spanish translation,
we improve absolute word translation accuracy by 6 percent. For the Spanish to English task, we improve absolute word translation accuracy by 9 percent. This indicates that our model is able to learn fine-grained translation
equivalences from the monolingual data by using only the
raw-text, sentence-aligned parallel data, despite the lack of
word-level alignments or training dictionaries.

setting. We have motivated the reason for the crosslingual setting as helping to uncover a better approximation
of the global alignment statistics from the observed local,
sentence-level co-occurrences.
Despite the speedup, the model is still much slower to use
than offline methods like translation matrix (Mikolov et al.,
2013a) or multilingual CCA (Faruqui & Dyer, 2014). However, results on the translation task suggest BilBOWA can
learn finer-grained cross-lingual relationships than these
methods, and can train over much larger monolingual
datasets than parallel-only methods. If the goal is to learn
high-quality general purpose bilingual embeddings, it is always beneficial to leverage more training data, and hence a
hybrid model like BilBOWA might be a better choice than
a parallel-only technique like BiCVM or BAEs.

6. Discussion

7. Conclusion

The BilBOWA model as introduced in this paper utilizes
a sampled L2 bag-of-words cross-lingual loss. This is the
main source of the significant speedup over the Klementiev
model, allowing training to scale to much larger datasets,
which in turn yields more accurate features. We found
that the asynchronous implementation significantly speeds
up training with no noticeable impact on the quality of
the learned embeddings, and the parallel subsampling improves the accuracy of the learned features. Getting asynchronous training to work required clipping the updates,
especially as the dimensionality of the embeddings gets
larger. Parallel subsampling makes training more accurate,
especially for the frequent words, and therefore turns out
to be important both in the monolingual and crosslingual

We introduce BilBOWA, a computationally-efficient model
for inducing bilingual distributed word representations directly from monolingual raw text and a limited amount of
parallel data, without requiring word-alignments or dictionaries. BilBOWA combines advances in training monolingual word embeddings with a particularly efficient novel
sampled cross-lingual objective. The result is that the required computations per training step scales only with the
number of words in the sentences, thereby enabling efficient large-scale cross-lingual training. We achieve stateof-the-art results for English-German cross-lingual document classification whilst obtaining up to three orders of
magnitude speedup, and improve upon the previous state
of the art in an English-Spanish word-translation task.

BilBOWA: Fast Bilingual Distributed Representations without Word Alignments

References
Al-Rfou’, Rami, Perozzi, Bryan, and Skiena, Steven. Polyglot:
Distributed word representations for multilingual nlp. In Proceedings of the Seventeenth Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning, pp. 183–192, Sofia, Bulgaria, August 2013. Association for Computational Linguistics. URL
http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W13-3520.
Bengio, Y, Ducharme, R, and Vincent, P. A neural probabilistic language model. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
2003. URL http://ukpmc.ac.uk/abstract/CIT/
412956.
Bengio, Yoshua and Senecal, J-S. Adaptive importance sampling
to accelerate training of a neural probabilistic language model.
Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on, 19(4):713–722, 2008.
Blitzer, J., McDonald, R., and Pereira, F. Domain adaptation with
structural correspondence learning. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Sydney, Australia, 2006.
Chandar, Sarath, Lauly, Stanislas, Larochelle, Hugo, Khapra,
Mitesh M., Ravidran, Balaraman, Raykar, Vikas, and Saha,
Amrita. An autoencoder approach to learning bilingual word
representations. Proceedings of NIPS 2014, 2014.
Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., Kavukcuoglu,
K., and Kuksa, P. Natural language processing (almost) from
scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12:2493–
2537, 2011.
Daumé III, Hal. Frustratingly easy domain adaptation. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2009.
Dyer, Chris, Chahuneau, Victor, and Smith, Noah A. A simple,
fast, and effective reparameterization of ibm model 2. ACL,
2013.
Faruqui, Manaal and Dyer, Chris. Improving vector space word
representations using multilingual correlation. In Proceedings
of EACL 2014, 2014.
Goldberg, Yoav and Levy, Omer. word2vec explained: Deriving
mikolov et al.s negative-sampling word-embedding method.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1402.3722, 2014.
Hermann, Karl Moritz and Blunsom, Phil. Multilingual distributed representations without word alignment.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1312.6173, 2013.
Klementiev, Alexandre, Titov, Ivan, and Bhattarai, Binod. Inducing crosslingual distributed representations of words. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational
Linguistics (COLING), Bombay, India, December 2012.
Koehn, Philipp. Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine translation. In MT summit, volume 5, pp. 79–86, 2005.
Lewis, David D, Yang, Yiming, Rose, Tony G, and Li, Fan. Rcv1:
A new benchmark collection for text categorization research.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 5:361–397, 2004.

Mikolov, Tomas, Le, Quoc V, and Sutskever, Ilya. Exploiting
similarities among languages for machine translation. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2013a.
Mikolov, Tomas, Sutskever, Ilya, Chen, Kai, Corrado, Greg S, and
Dean, Jeff. Distributed representations of words and phrases
and their compositionality. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, pp. 3111–3119, 2013b.
Mnih, Andriy and Teh, Yee Whye. A fast and simple algorithm
for training neural probabilistic language models. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML), 2012.
Och, Franz Josef and Ney, Hermann. A systematic comparison of
various statistical alignment models. Computational Linguistics, 29(1):19–51, 2003.
Pan, Sinno Jialin and Yang, Qiang. A survey on transfer learning.
Knowledge and Data Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 22
(10):1345–1359, 2010.
Pennington, Jeffrey, Socher, Richard, and Manning, Christopher D. Glove: Global vectors for word representation. Proceedings of the Empiricial Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2014), 12, 2014.
Turian, J., Ratinov, L., and Bengio, Y. Word representations: A
simple and general method for semi-supervised learning. In
Proceedings of the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 384–394. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2010.
Walker, Alastair J. An efficient method for generating discrete
random variables with general distributions. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 3(3):253–256, 1977.
Zou, Will Y, Socher, Richard, Cer, Daniel, and Manning, Christopher D. Bilingual word embeddings for phrase-based machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), 2013.

