Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

Bernhard Schölkopf
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tübingen, GERMANY

BS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE

David W. Hogg
DAVID . HOGG @ NYU . EDU
Dun Wang
DW 1519@ NYU . EDU
Daniel Foreman-Mackey
FOREMAN . MACKEY @ GMAIL . COM
Center for Cosmology and Particle Physics, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA
Dominik Janzing
DOMINIK . JANZING @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Carl-Johann Simon-Gabriel
CARL - JOHANN . SIMON - GABRIEL @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Jonas Peters
JONAS . PETERS @ TUEBINGEN . MPG . DE
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 72076 Tübingen, GERMANY

Abstract
We describe a method for removing the effect of
confounders in order to reconstruct a latent quantity of interest. The method, referred to as halfsibling regression, is inspired by recent work in
causal inference using additive noise models. We
provide a theoretical justification and illustrate
the potential of the method in a challenging astronomy application.

1. Introduction
The present paper proposes and analyzes a method for
removing the effect of confounding noise. The analysis is based on a hypothetical underlying causal structure. The method does not infer causal structures; rather,
it is influenced by a recent thrust to try to understand
how causal structures facilitate machine learning tasks
(Schölkopf et al., 2012).

of jointly independent noise variables, one for each vertex,
and a “structural equation” for each variable that describes
how the latter is computed by evaluating a deterministic
function of its noise variable and its parents. This view,
referred to as a functional causal model (or nonlinear structural equation model), leads to the same class of joint distributions over all variables (Pearl, 2000; Peters et al., 2014),
and we may thus choose either representation.
The functional point of view is useful in that it often makes
it easier to come up with assumptions on the causal mechanisms that are at work, i.e., on the functions associated with
the variables. For instance, it was recently shown (Hoyer
et al., 2009) that assuming nonlinear functions with additive noise renders the two–variable case identifiable — i.e.,
a case where conditional independence tests do not provide
any information, and it was thus previously believed that it
is impossible to infer the structure of the graph based on
observational data.

Causal graphical models as pioneered by Pearl (2000);
Spirtes et al. (1993) are joint probability distributions over
a set of variables X1 , . . . , Xn , along with directed graphs
(usually, acyclicity is assumed) with vertices Xi , and arrows indicating direct causal influences. By the causal
Markov assumption, each vertex Xi is independent of its
non-descendants, given its parents.

In this work we start from the functional point of view and
assume the underlying causal graph shown in Fig. 1. Here,
N, Q, X, Y are jointly random variables (RVs) (i.e., RVs
defined on the same underlying probability space), taking
values denoted by n, q, x, y. We do not require the ranges
of the random variables to be R, in particular, they may be
vectorial. All equalities regarding random variables should
be interpreted to hold with probability one. We further (implicitly) assume the existence of conditional expectations.

There is an alternative view of causal models, which does
not start from a joint distribution. Instead, it assumes a set

2. Half-Sibling Regression

Proceedings of the 32 nd International Conference on Machine
Learning, Lille, France, 2015. JMLR: W&CP volume 37. Copyright 2015 by the author(s).

Suppose we are interested in the quantity Q, but unfortunately we cannot observe it directly. Instead, we observe
Y , which we think of as a degraded version of Q that is

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

unobserved

observed

Q

Y

from Q and N . This includes the possibility of adding an
offset, which we will see below.

N

X

Figure 1. We are interested in reconstructing the quantity Q based
on the observables X and Y affected by noise N , using the knowledge that (N, X) ⊥
⊥ Q. Note that the involved quantities need not
be scalars, which makes the model more general than it seems
at first glance. For instance, we can think of N as a multidimensional vector, some components of which affect only X,
some only Y , and some both X and Y .

We next propose an assumption which allows for a practical
method to solve the problem of reconstructing Q up to the
above gauge freedom. The method is surprisingly simple,
and while we have not seen it in the same form elsewhere,
we do not want to claim originality for it. Related tricks
are occasionally applied in practice, often employing factor analysis to account for confounding effects (Price et al.,
2006; Yu et al., 2006; Johnson & Li, 2007; Kang et al.,
2008; Stegle et al., 2008; Gagnon-Bartsch & Speed, 2011).
We will also present a theoretical analysis that provides insight into why and when these methods work.
2.1. Complete Information

affected by noise N . Clearly, without knowledge of N ,
there is no way to recover Q. However, we assume that
N also affects another observable quantity (or a collection
of quantities) X. By the graph structure, conditional on
Y , the variables Q and X are dependent (in the generic
case), thus X contains information about Q. This situation
is quite common if X and Y are measurements performed
with the same apparatus, introducing the noise N . In the
physical sciences, this is often referred to as systematics, to
convey the intuition that these errors are not simply due to
random fluctuations, but caused by systematic influences of
the measuring device. In our application below, both types
of errors occur, but we will not try to tease them apart.
How can we use this information in practice? Unfortunately, without further restrictions, this problem is still
too hard. Suppose that N randomly switches between
{1, . . . , v}, where v ∈ N (Schölkopf et al., 2012). Define
the structural equation fY for the variable Y as follows:
y = fY (n, q) := fn (q), where f1 , . . . , fv are v distinct
functions that compute Y from Q — in other words, we
randomly switch between v different mechanisms. Clearly,
no matter how many pairs (x, y) we observe, we can choose
a sufficiently large v along with functions f1 , . . . , fv such
that there is no way of gleaning any reliable information
on Q from the fi (Q) — e.g., there may be more fi than
there were data points. Things could get even worse: for
instance, N could be real valued, and switch between an
uncountable number of functions. To prevent this kind of
behavior, we need to simplify the way in which Y is allowed to depend on N .
Before we do so, we need to point out a fundamental limitation. The above example shows that it can be arbitrarily
hard to get information about Q from finite data. However,
even from infinite data, only partial information is available
and certain “gauge” degrees of freedom remain. In particular, given a reconstructed Q, we can always construct
another one by applying an invertible transformation to it,
and incorporating its inverse into the function computing Y

Inspired by recent work in causal inference, we use nonlinear additive noise models (Hoyer et al., 2009). Specifically,
we assume that there exists a function f such that
Y = Q + f (N ).

(1)

Note that we could equally well assume the more general
form Y = g(Q) + f (N ), and the following analysis would
look the same. However, in view of the above remark about
the gauge freedom, this is not necessary since Q can at most
be identified up to a (nonlinear) reparametrization anyway.
Note, moreover, that while for Hoyer et al. (2009), the input
of f is observed and we want to decide if it is a cause of Y ,
in the present setting the input of f is unobserved (Janzing
et al., 2009), and the goal is to recover Q, which for Hoyer
et al. (2009) played the role of the noise.
The intuition behind our approach is as follows. Since
X ⊥
⊥ Q, X cannot predict Q, and thus neither Q’s influence on Y . It may contain information, however, about the
influence of N on Y , since X is also influenced by N . Now
suppose we try to predict Y from X. As argued above,
whatever comes from Q cannot be predicted, hence only
the component coming from N will be picked up. Trying
to predict Y from X is thus a vehicle to selectively capture
N ’s influence on Y , with the goal of subsequently removing it, to obtain an estimate of Q referred to as Q̂:
Definition 1
Q̂ := Y − E[Y |X]

(2)

For an additive model (1), our intuition can be formalized:
in this case, we can predict the additive component in Y
coming from N — which is exactly what we want to remove to cancel the confounding effect of N and thus reconstruct Q (up to an offset):
Proposition 1 Suppose N, X are jointly random variables, and f is a measurable function. If there exists a

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

function ψ such that
f (N ) = ψ(X),

(3)

i.e., f (N ) can in principle be predicted from X perfectly,
then we have
f (N ) = E[f (N )|X].

(4)

If, moreover, the additive model assumption (1) holds, with
Q, Y RVs on the same underlying probability space, and
Q⊥
⊥ X, then
Q̂ = Q − E[Q].
(5)
In our main application below, N will be systematic errors
from an astronomical spacecraft and telescope, Y will be
a star under analysis, and X will be a large set of other
stars. In this case, the assumption that f (N ) = ψ(X) has
a concrete interpretation: it means that the device can be
self-calibrated based on measured science data only (Padmanabhan et al., 2008).
Proof. Due to (3), we have
E[f (N )|X] = E[ψ(X)|X] = ψ(X) = f (N ).

(6)

To show the second statement, consider the conditional expectation
E[Y |X] = E[Q + f (N )|X]
(7)
Using Q ⊥
⊥ X and (4), we get
E[Y |X] = E[Q] + f (N ) = E[Q] + Y − Q.
Recalling Definition 1 completes the proof.

(8)


Proposition 1 provides us with a principled recommendation how to remove the effect of the noise and reconstruct the unobserved Q up to its mean E[Q]: we need
to subtract the conditional expectation (i.e., the regression)
E[Y |X] from the observed Y (Definition 1). The regression E[Y |X] can be estimated from observations (xi , yi )
using (linear or nonlinear) off-the-shelf methods. We refer to this procedure as half-sibling regression to reflect the
fact that we are trying to explain aspects of the child Y by
regression on its half-sibling(s) X in order to reconstruct
properties of its unobserved parent Q.
Note that m(x) := E[f (N )|X = x] is a function of x, and
E[f (N )|X] is the random variable m(X). Correspondingly, (4) is an equality of RVs. By assumption, all RVs live
on the same underlying probability space. If we perform
the associated random experiment, we obtain values for X
and N , and (4) tells us that if we substitute them into m and
f , respectively, we get the same value with probability 1.
Eq. (5) is also an equality of RVs, and the above procedure

therefore not only reconstructs some properties of the unobservable RV Q — it reconstructs, up to the mean E[Q],
and with probability 1, the RV itself. This may sound too
good to be true — in practice, of course its accuracy will
depend on how well the assumptions of Proposition 1 hold.
If the following conditions are met, we may expect that the
procedure should work well in practice:
(i) X should be (almost) independent of Q — otherwise,
our method could possibly remove parts of Q itself, and
thus throw out the baby with the bathtub. A sufficient condition for this to be the case is that N be (almost) independent of Q, which often makes sense in practice, e.g., if N
is introduced by a measuring device in a way independent
of the underlying object being measured. Clearly, we can
only hope to remove noise that is independent of the signal, otherwise it would be unclear what is noise and what
is signal. A sufficient condition for N ⊥
⊥ Q, finally, is that
the causal DAG in Fig. 1 correctly describes the underlying
causal structure. Note, however, that Proposition 1 and thus
our method also applies if N 6⊥
⊥ Q, as long as X ⊥
⊥ Q.
(ii) The observable X is chosen such that Y can be predicted as well as possible from it; i.e., X contains enough
information about f (N ) and, ideally, N acts on both X and
Y in similar ways such that a “simple” function class suffices for solving the regression problem in practice.
This may sound like a rather strong requirement, but we
will see that in our astronomy application, it is not unrealistic: X will be a large vector of pixels of other stars, and
we will use them to predict a pixel Y of a star of interest. In
this kind of problem, the main variability of Y will often be
due to the systematic effects due to the instrument N also
affecting other stars, and thus a large set of other stars will
indeed allow a good prediction of the measured Y .
Note that it is not required that the underlying structural
equation model be linear — N can act on X and Y in nonlinear ways, as an additive term f (N ).
In practice, we never observe N directly, and thus it is hard
to tell whether the assumption of perfect predictability of
f (N ) from X holds true. We now relax this assumption.
2.2. Incomplete Information
First we observe that E[f (N )|X] is a good approximation
for f (N ) whenever f (N ) is almost determined by X:
Lemma 2 For any two jointly random variables Z, X, we
have
E[(Z − E[Z|X])2 ] = E[Var[Z|X]].

(9)

Here, E[Z|X] is the random variable g(X) with g(x) =
E[Z|X = x], and Var[Z|X] is the random variable h(X)

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

with h(x) = Var[Z|X = x]. Then (9) turns into
E[(Z − g(X))2 ] = E[h(X)] .

(10)

Proof. Note that for any random variable Z we have
Var[Z|X = x] = E[(Z − E[Z|X = x])2 |X = x] ,

from which we get noisy observations Y and X. Proposition 5 below shows that observing many different Xi helps
reconstructing Q, even if all Xi depend on N through different functions gi and their underlying (independent) signals Ri do not follow the same distribution.
Proposition 4 Assume that Y = Q + f (N ) and let

by the definition of variance, applied to the variable Z|X=x .
Hence
Var[Z|X] = E[(Z − E[Z|X])2 |X] ,
where both sides are functions of X. Taking the expectation w.r.t. X on both sides yields

X s := g(N ) + s · R ,
where R, N and Q are jointly independent, f ∈ Cb1 (R),
g ∈ C 1 (R), s ∈ R, and g is invertible. Then
L2

Q̂s → Q − E[Q]

s → 0,

as

where Q̂s := Y − E[Y |X s ].

2

E[Var[Z|X]] = E[(Z − E[Z|X]) ] ,
where we have used the law of total expectation
E[E[W |X]] = E[W ] on the right hand side.

This leads to a stronger result for our estimator Q̂ (2):

The proof is skipped since it is analogous to the more complicated proof of Proposition 5.
Proposition 5 Assume that Y = Q+f (N ) and that Xd :=
(X1 , . . . , Xd ) satisfies
Xi := gi (N ) + Ri ,

Proposition 3 Let f be measurable, N, Q, X, Y jointly
random variables with Q ⊥
⊥ X, and Y = Q + f (N ).
The expected squared deviation between Q̂ and Q − E[Q]
satisfies
E[(Q̂ − (Q − E[Q]))2 ] = E[Var[f (N )|X]] .

(11)

where
P∞ 1all Ri , N and Q 1 are jointly 1 independent,
i=1 i2 var(Ri ) < ∞, f ∈ Cb (R), gi ∈ C (R) for all i,
and
d
1X
g̃d :=
gj
d j=1
is invertible with (g̃d−1 )d uniformly equicontinuous. Then

Proof. We rewrite the argument of the square in (11) as

L2

Q̂d → Q − E[Q]

Q̂ − (Q − E[Q])

as

d → ∞,

where we define Q̂d := Y − E[Y |Xd ].

= Y − E[Y |X] − Q + E[Q]
= f (N ) + Q − E[f (N )|X] − E[Q|X] − Q + E[Q]
= f (N ) − E[f (N )|X].
The result follows using Lemma 2 with Z := f (N ).

i = 1, . . . , d,



Note that Proposition 1 is a special case of Proposition 3:
if there exists a function ψ such that ψ(X) = f (N ), then
the r.h.s. of (11) vanishes. Proposition 3 drops this assumption, which is more realistic: consider the case where
X = g(N ) + R, where R is another random variable.
In this case, we cannot expect to reconstruct the variable
f (N ) from X exactly.
There are, however, two settings where we would still expect good approximate recovery of Q:
(i) If the standard deviation of R goes to zero, the signal of
N in X becomes strong and we can approximately estimate
f (N ) from X, see Proposition 4.
(ii) Alternatively, we observe many different effects of N .
In the astronomy application below, Q and R are stars,

Proof. By Kolmogorov’s strong law, we have for µ̄d
Pd
1
i=1 E[Ri ] that
d
Pd
1
i=1 Ri − µ̄d
d
P
d
1
(gi (N ) + Ri ) − µ̄d − g̃d (N )
⇒
 dP i=1

∗
d
⇒ g̃d−1 d1 i=1 (gi (N ) + Ri ) − µ̄d − g̃d−1 (g̃d (N ))

 P
d
⇒
g̃d−1 d1 i=1 Xi − µ̄d − N

 P

∗∗
d
⇒
f g̃d−1 d1 i=1 Xi − µ̄d − f (N )
⇒

:=
P

→0
P

→0
P

→0
P

→0
P

→0
P

ψd (Xd ) − f (N )

→0

for some ψd that are uniformly bounded in d (the implication ∗ follows from uniform equicontinuity, implication ∗∗
by the continuous mapping theorem).1 This implies
L2

E[f (N )|Xd ] − f (N ) → 0
1

P

The notation → denotes convergence in probability with respect to the measure P of the underlying probability space.

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

unobserved

Q

observed

Y

N

X

Figure 2. Causal structure from Fig. 1 when relaxing the assumption that X is an effect of N .

because
2

2

E[(f (N ) − E[f (N )|Xd ]) ] ≤ E[(f (N ) − ψd (Xd )) ]→0
(The convergence of the right hand side follows from
P
ψd (Xd )−f (N ) → 0 and boundedness of ψd (Xd )−f (N )).
But then
Q − E[Q] − Q̂d = −f (N ) − E[Q] + E[f (N ) + Q|Xd ]
L2

= E[f (N )|Xd ] − f (N ) → 0

The next subsection mentions an optional extension of
our approach. Another extension, to the case of timedependent data, is briefly discussed elsewhere (Schölkopf
et al., 2015).
2.3. Prediction from Non-Effects of the Noise Variable
While Fig. 1 shows the causal structure motivating our
work, our method does not require a directed arrow from
N to X — it only requires that N 6⊥
⊥ X, to ensure that X
contains information about N . We can represent this by an
undirected connection between the two (Fig. 2), and note
that such a dependence may arise from an arrow directed in
either direction, and/or another confounder that influences
both N and X. This confounder need not act deterministically on N , hence effectively removing our earlier requirement of a deterministic effect, cf. (1).

3. Applications
3.1. Synthetic Data
We analyze two simulated data sets that illustrate the identifiability statements from Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
Increasing relative strength of N in a single X. We
consider 20 instances (each time we sample 200 i.i.d. data
points) of the model Y = f (N ) + Q and X = g(N ) + R,
where f and g are randomly chosen sigmoid functions and
the variables N , Q and R are normally distributed. The
standard deviation for R is chosen uniformly between 0.05
and 1, the standard deviation for N is between 0.5 and 1.
Because Q can be recovered only up to a shift in the mean,
we set its sample mean to zero. The distribution for R,

Figure 3. Left: we observe a variable X = g(N ) + R with invertible function g. If the variance of R decreases, the reconstruction
of Q improves because it becomes easier to remove the influence
f (N ) of the noise N from the variable Y = f (N ) + Q by using
X, see Proposition 4. Right: a similar behavior occurs with increasing the number p of predictor variables Xi = gi (N ) + Ri ,
see Proposition 5. Both plots show 20 scenarios, each connected
by a thin line.

however, has a mean that is chosen uniformly between −1
and 1 and its standard deviation is chosen from the vector (1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0.0625, 0.03125, 0). Proposition 4
shows that with decreasing standard deviation of R we can
recover the signal Q. Standard deviation zero corresponds
to the case of complete information (Section 2.1). For
regressing Y on X, we use the function gam (penalized
regression splines) from the R-package mgcv; Figure 3
shows that this asymptotic behavior can be seen on finite
data sets.
Increasing number of observed Xi variables. Here, we
consider the same simulation setting as before, this time
simulating Xi = gi (N ) + Ri for i = 1, . . . , p. We have
shown in Proposition 5 that if the number of variables Xi
tends to infinity, we are able to reconstruct the signal Q.
In this experiment, the standard deviation for Ri and Q
is chosen uniformly between 0.05 and 1; The distribution
of N is the same as above. It is interesting to note that
even additive models (in the predictor variables) work as
a regression method (we use the function gam from the
R-package mgcv on all variables X1 , . . . , Xp and its sum
X1 + . . . + Xp ). Figure 3 shows that with increasing p the
reconstruction of Q improves.
3.2. Exoplanet Light Curves
The field of exoplanet search has recently become one of
the most popular areas of astronomy research. This is
largely due to the Kepler space observatory launched in
2009. Kepler observed a tiny fraction of the Milky Way in
search of exoplanets. The telescope was pointed at same
patch of sky for more than four years (Fig. 4). In that

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

patch, it monitored the brightness of 150000 stars (selected
from among 3.5 million stars in the search field), taking a
stream of half-hour exposures using a set of CCD (ChargeCoupled Device) imaging chips arranged in its focal plane
using the layout visible in Fig. 4.

Figure 4. Kepler search field as seen from Earth, located close to
the Milky Way plane, in a star-rich area near the constellation
Cygnus (image credit: NASA).

Figure 5. Sketch of the transit method for exoplanet detection. As
a planet passes in front of its host star, we can observe a small dip
in the apparent star brightness (image credit: NASA Ames).

Kepler detects exoplanets using the transit method. Whenever a planet passes in front of their host star(s), we observe
a tiny dip in the light curve (Fig. 5). This signal is rather
faint, and for our own planet as seen from space, it would
amount to a brightness change smaller than 10−4 , lasting
less than half a day, taking place once a year, and visible
from about half a percent of all directions. The level of required photometric precision to detect such transits is one
of the main motivations for performing these observations
in space, where they are not disturbed by atmospheric effects, and it is possible to observe the same patch almost
continuously using the same instrument.
For planets orbiting stars in the habitable zone (allowing
for liquid water) of stars similar to the sun, we would expect the signal to be observable at most every few months.
We thus have very few observations of each transit. However, it has become clear that there is a number of confounders introduced by spacecraft and telescope that lead
to systematic changes in the light curves which are of the

same magnitude or larger than the required accuracy. The
dominant error is pointing jitter: if the camera field moves
by a tiny fraction of a pixel (for Kepler, the order of magnitude is 0.01 pixels), then the light distribution on the pixels will change. Each star affects a set of pixels (Fig. 9
in (Schölkopf et al., 2015)), and we integrate their measurements to get an estimate of the star’s overall brightness. Unfortunately, the pixel sensitivities are not precisely
identical, and even though one can try to correct for this,
we are left with significant systematic errors. Overall, although Kepler is highly optimized for stable photometric
measurements, its accuracy falls short of what is required
for reliably detecting earth-like planets in habitable zones
of sun-like stars.
We obtained the data from the Mikulski Archive for Space
Telescopes (MAST) (see http://archive.stsci.
edu/index.html). Our system, which we abbreviate
as CPM (Causal Pixel Model), is based on the assumption that stars on the same CCD share systematic errors.
If we pick two stars on the same CCD that are far away
from each other, they will be light years apart in space and
no physical interaction between them can take place. As
Fig. 9 in (Schölkopf et al., 2015) shows, the light curves
nevertheless have similar trends, which is caused by systematics. In CPM, we use linear regression to predict the
light curve of each pixel belonging to the target star as a
linear combination of a set of predictor pixels. Specifically, we use 4000 predictor pixels from about 150 stars,
which are selected to be closest in magnitude to the target
star.2 This is done since the systematic effects of the instruments depend somewhat on the star brightness; e.g., when
a star saturates a pixel, blooming takes place and the signal
leaks to neighboring pixels. To rule out any direct optical
cross-talk by stray light, we require that the predictor pixels
are from stars sufficiently far away from the target star (at
least 20 pixels distance on the CCD), but we always take
them from the same CCD (note that Kepler has a number
of CCDs, and we expect that systematic errors depend on
the CCD). We train the model separately for each month,
which contains about 1300 data points.3 Standard L2 regularization is employed to avoid overfitting, and parameters
(regularization strength and number of input pixels) were
optimized using cross-validation. Nonlinear kernel regression was also evaluated, but did not lead to better results.
This may be due to the fact that the set of predictor pixels is relatively large (compared to the training set size);
and among this large set, it seems that there are sufficiently
many pixels who are affected by the systematics in a rather
2
The exact number of stars varies with brightness, as brighter
stars have larger images on the CCD and thus more pixels.
3
The data come in batches which are separated by larger errors, since the spacecraft needs to periodically re-direct its antenna to send the data back to earth.

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

similar way as the target.
We have observed in our results that the method removes
some of the intrinsic variability of the target star. This is
due to the fact that the signals are not i.i.d. and time acts
as a confounder. If among the predictor stars, there exists
one whose intrinsic variability is very similar to the target star, then the regression can attenuate variability in the
latter. This is unlikely to work exactly, but given the limited observation window, an approximate match (e.g., stars
varying at slightly different frequencies) will already lead
to some amount of attenuation. Since exoplanet transits are
very rare, it is extremely unlikely (but not impossible) that
the same mechanism will remove some transits.
Note that for the purpose of exoplanet search, the stellar
variability can be considered a confounder as well, independent of the planet positions which are causal for transits. In order to remove this, we use as additional regression inputs also past and future of the target star. This adds
an autoregressive (AR) component to our model, removing more of the stellar variability and thus increasing the
sensitivity for transits. In this case, we select an exclusion
window around the point of time being corrected, to ensure that we do not remove the transit itself. Below, we
report results where the AR component uses as inputs the
three closest future and the three closest past time points,
subject to the constraint that a window of ±9 hours around
the considered time point is excluded. Choosing this window corresponds to the assumption that time points earlier
than -9 hours or later than +9 hours are not informative
for the transit itself. Smaller windows allow more accurate prediction, at the risk of damaging slow transit signals. Our code is available at https://github.com/
jvc2688/KeplerPixelModel.
To give a view on how our method performs, CPM is applied on several stars with known transit signals. After that,
we compare them with the Kepler Pre-search Data Conditioning (PDC) method (see http://keplergo.arc.
nasa.gov/PipelinePDC.shtml). The first version
of PDC removed systematic errors based on correlations
with a set of ancillary engineering data, including temperatures at the detector electronics below the CCD array, and
polynomials describing centroid motions of stars. The current PDC (Stumpe et al., 2012) performs PCA on filtered
light curves of stars, projects the light curve of the target
star on a PCA subspace, and subsequently removes this
projection. The PCA is performed on a set of relatively
quiet stars close in position and magnitude. For non-i.i.d.
data, this procedure could remove temporal structure of
interest. To prevent this, the PCA subspace is restricted
to eight dimensions, strongly limiting the capacity of the
model (cf. Foreman-Mackey et al., 2015).
In Fig. 6, we present corrected light curves for three typical

stars of different magnitudes, using both CPM and PDC.
Note that in our theoretical analysis, we dealt with additive noise, and could deal with multiplicative noise, e.g.,
by log transforming. In practice, none of the two models is
correct for our application. If we are interested in the transit (and not the stellar variability), then the variability is a
multiplicative confounder. At the same time, other noises
may better be modeled as additive (e.g., CCD noise). In
practice, we calibrate the data by dividing by the regression estimate and then subtracting 1, i.e.,
Y
E[Y |x]
Y − E[Y |x]
Y
−1=
−
=
.
E[Y |x]
E[Y |x] E[Y |x]
E[Y |x]
Effectively, we thus perform a subtractive normalization,
followed by a divisive one. This worked well, taking care
of both types of contaminations.
The results illustrate that our approach removes a major
part of the variability present in the PDC light curves, while
preserving the transit signals. To provide a quantitative
comparison, we ran CPM on 1000 stars from the whole
Kepler input catalog (500 chosen randomly from the whole
list, and 500 random G-type sun-like stars), and estimate
the Combined Differential Photometric Precision (CDPP)
for CPM and PDC. CDPP is an estimate of the relative precision in a time window, indicating the noise level seen by
a transit signal with a given duration. The duration is typically chosen to be 3, 6, or 12 hours (Christiansen et al.,
2012). Shorter durations are appropriate for planets close
to their host stars, which are the ones that are easier to detect. We use the 12-hours CDPP metric, since the transit
duration of an earth-like planet is roughly 10 hours. Fig. 7
presents our CDPP comparison of CPM and PDC, showing
that our method outperforms PDC. This is no small feat,
since PDC is highly optimized for the task at hand, incorporating substantial astronomical knowledge (e.g., it attempts
to remove stellar variability as well as systematic trends).

4. Conclusion
We have assayed a simple yet effective method for removing the effect of systematic noise from observations. It utilizes the information contained in a set of other observations affected by the same noise source. The main motivation for the method was its application to exoplanet data
processing, which we discussed in some detail, with rather
promising results. However, we expect that it will have a
large range of applications in other domains as well.
We expect that our method may enable astronomical discoveries at higher sensitivity on the existing Kepler satellite data. Moreover, we anticipate that methods to remove
systematic errors will further increase in importance: by
May 2013, two of the four reaction wheels used to control
the Kepler spacecraft were disfunctional, and in May 2014,

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 6. Corrected fluxes using our method, for three example stars, spanning the main magnitude (brightness) range encountered. In
(a), we consider a bright star, in (b), a star of moderate brightness, and in (c), a relatively faint star. SAP stands for Simple Aperture
Photometry (in our case, a relative flux measure computed from summing over the pixels belonging to a star). In all three panels, the top
plot shows the SAP flux (black) and the CPM regression (red), i.e., our prediction of the star from other stars. The middle panel shows
the CPM flux corrected using the regression (details see text), and the bottom shows the PDC flux (i.e., the default method). The CPM
flux curve preserves the exoplanet transits (little downward spikes), while removing a substantial part of the variability present in the
PDC flux. All x-axes show time, measured in days since 1/1/2009.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7. Comparison of the proposed method (CPM) to the Kepler PDC method in terms of Combined Differential Photometric Precision (CDPP) (see text). Plot (a) shows our performance (red) vs. the PDC performance in a scatter plot, as a function of star magnitude
(note that larger magnitude means fainter stars, and smaller values of CDPP indicate a higher quality as measured by CDPP. Plot (b)
bins the same dataset and shows box plots within each bin, indicating median, top quartile and bottom quartile. The red box corresponds
to CPM, while the black box refers to PDC. Plot (c), finally, shows a histogram of CDPP values. Note that the red histogram has more
mass towards the left, i.e., smaller values of CDPP, indicating that our method overall outperforms PDC, the Kepler “gold standard.”

NASA announced the K2 mission, using the remaining two
wheels in combination with thrusters to control the spacecraft and continue the search for exoplanets in other star
fields. Systematic errors in K2 data are significantly larger
since the spacecraft has become harder to control. In addition, NASA is planning the launch of another space telescope for 2017. TESS (Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite)4 will perform an all-sky survey for small (earth-like)
planets of nearby stars. To date, no earth-like planets orbiting sun-like stars in the habitable zone have been found.
This is likely to change in the years to come, which would
be a major scientific discovery.5 Machine learning can con4

http://tess.gsfc.nasa.gov/
5
“Decades, or even centuries after the TESS survey is completed, the new planetary systems it discovers will continue to be

tribute significantly towards the analysis of these datasets,
and the present paper is only a start.

Acknowledgments
We thank Stefan Harmeling, James McMurray, Oliver Stegle and Kun Zhang for helpful discussion, and the anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions and references. C-J
S-G was supported by a Google Europe Doctoral Fellowship in Causal Inference.

studied because they are both nearby and bright. In fact, when
starships transporting colonists first depart the solar system, they
may well be headed toward a TESS-discovered planet as their new
home.” (Haswell, 2010)

Removing systematic errors for exoplanet search via latent causes

References
Christiansen, J. L., Jenkins, J. M., Caldwell, D. A., Burke,
C. J., Tenenbaum, P., Seader, S., Thompson, S. E., Barclay, T. S., Clarke, B. D., Li, J., Smith, J. C., Stumpe,
M. C., Twicken, J. D., and Van Cleve, J. The Derivation,
Properties, and Value of Kepler’s Combined Differential
Photometric Precision. Publications of the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific, 124:1279–1287, 2012.
Foreman-Mackey, D., Montet, B. T., Hogg, D. W., Morton,
T. D., Wang, D., and Schölkopf, B. A systematic search
for transiting planets in the K2 data. arXiv:1502.04715,
2015.
Gagnon-Bartsch, J. A. and Speed, T. P. Biostatistics, 13:
539–552, 2011.
Haswell, Carole A. Transiting Exoplanets. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
Hoyer, P. O., Janzing, D., Mooij, J. M., Peters, J., and
Schölkopf, B. Nonlinear causal discovery with additive
noise models. In Koller, D., Schuurmans, D., Bengio,
Y., and Bottou, L. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 21, pp. 689–696, 2009.
Janzing, D., Peters, J., Mooij, J., and Schölkopf, B. Identifying confounders using additive noise models. In
Bilmes, J and Ng, AY (eds.), 25th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, pp. 249–257, Corvallis,
OR, USA, 2009. AUAI Press.
Johnson, W. E. and Li, C. Adjusting batch effects in microarray expression data using empirical Bayes methods.
Biostatistics, 8:118127, 2007.
Kang, H. M., Ye, C., and Eskin, E. Genetics, 180(4):1909–
1925, 2008.
Padmanabhan, N., Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., Barentine, J. C., Blanton, M. R., Brewington, H. J., Gunn,
J. E., Harvanek, M., Hogg, D. W., Ivezić, Ž., Johnston,
D., Kent, S. M., Kleinman, S. J., Knapp, G. R., Krzesinski, J., Long, D., Neilsen, Jr., E. H., Nitta, A., Loomis,
C., Lupton, R. H., Roweis, S., Snedden, S. A., Strauss,
M. A., and Tucker, D. L. An Improved Photometric Calibration of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey Imaging Data.
The Astrophysical Journal, 674:1217–1233, 2008. doi:
10.1086/524677.
Pearl, J. Causality. Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Peters, J., Mooij, J.M., Janzing, D., and Schölkopf, B.
Causal discovery with continuous additive noise models.
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 15:2009–2053,
2014.

Price, Alkes L, Patterson, Nick J, Plenge, Robert M, Weinblatt, Michael E, Shadick, Nancy A, and Reich, David.
Nature Genetics, 38(8):904–909, 2006.
Schölkopf, B., Janzing, D., Peters, J., Sgouritsa, E., Zhang,
K., and Mooij, J. M. On causal and anticausal learning. In Langford, J and Pineau, J (eds.), Proceedings
of the 29th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), pp. 1255–1262, New York, NY, USA, 2012.
Omnipress.
Schölkopf, B., Hogg, D. W., , Wang, D., Foreman-Mackey,
D., Janzing, D., Simon-Gabriel, C.-J., and Peters, J.
arXiv:1505.03036, 2015.
Spirtes, P., Glymour, C., and Scheines, R. Causation, prediction, and search. Springer-Verlag. (2nd edition MIT
Press 2000), 1993.
Stegle, Oliver, Kannan, Anitha, Durbin, Richard, and
Winn, John M. Accounting for non-genetic factors improves the power of eQTL studies. In Proc. Research in
Computational Molecular Biology, 12th Annual International Conference, RECOMB, pp. 411–422, 2008.
Stumpe, M. C., Smith, J. C., Van Cleve, J. E., Twicken,
J. D., Barclay, T. S., Fanelli, M. N., Girouard, F. R.,
Jenkins, J. M., Kolodziejczak, J. J., McCauliff, S. D.,
and Morris, R. L. Kepler Presearch Data Conditioning
I - Architecture and Algorithms for Error Correction in
Kepler Light Curves. Publications of the Astronomical
Society of the Pacific, 124:985–999, 2012.
Yu, Jianming, Pressoir, Gael, Briggs, William H, Vroh Bi,
Irie, Yamasaki, Masanori, Doebley, John F, McMullen,
Michael D, Gaut, Brandon S, Nielsen, Dahlia M, Holland, James B, Kresovich, Stephen, and Buckler, Edward S. A unified mixed-model method for association
mapping that accounts for multiple levels of relatedness.
Nature Genetics, 38(2):203–208, 2006.

